Title: What preferences can - and cannot - predict in multi-agent online learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.13810v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 00:19:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 56

Markdown Content:
WHAT PREFERENCES CAN—AND CANNOT—PREDICT IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 

OMAR ABBADI c, ∗,♯ , RIDA LARAKI ∗, AND PANAYOTIS MERTIKOPOULOS ♯

Abstract. We examine the interplay between ordinal, preference-based solution concepts in games and the long-run behavior of game dynamics, asking in particular to what extent the combinatorial data of a game—its preference graph —determine the outcomes of no-regret learning dynamics—such as follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL). In one direction, we show that the skeleton of every dynamically stable set (i.e., the set of pure profiles it contains) must also be preferentially stable , that is, it must be closed under profitable deviations. We then ask the converse question: when do preferences determine the long-run behavior of the players’ learning dynamics? We begin by showing that preferences characterize asymptotic stability in the case of subgames —i.e., subsets of pure profiles obtained by restricting players’ action sets. Beyond this case however, the equivalence between dynamic and preferential stability collapses: concretely, we construct a three-player game with a preferentially stable set whose span is dynamically unstable ,showing in this way that preferences do not suffice as a criterion of dynamic stability. We then bridge this gap via the notion of resilience to aggregate deviations , an easy-to-check payoff-based condition that guarantees asymptotic stability of arbitrary spans of pure strategies. 

1. Introduction 

Can players learn to behave rationally by adapting to feedback from their environment? 

This question has been at the forefront of non-cooperative game theory and multi-agent learning [15, 23, 61], where interacting agents are commonly modeled through their governing dynamics [35, 67]. In particular, in many modern applications of game theory—from recommender platforms and auctions to large-scale multi-agent reinforcement learning [4, 25, 29, 49, 62]—the classical premises of full rationality, knowledge of the game, equilibrium computation, and consistently optimal play are unrealistic. As such, it is natural to take the above question as a starting point and ask what it implies for the players’ long-run behavior in a game-theoretic context. In view of this, we focus on the dynamics of follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) [34, 68, 69], a class of no-regret learning procedures which has become the gold standard for learning in games [15]. Under FTRL, players react to cumulative scores rather than instantaneous  

> c

Corresponding author.  

> ∗

Univ. Mohammed VI Polytechnic, CMSIS, Moroccan Center for Game Theory, 11103 Rabat, Morocco.  

> ♯

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France. 

E-mail addresses : omar.abbadi@um6p.ma, rida.laraki@um6p.ma, panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr .2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 91A26, 37N40; secondary 91A10, 91A22, 68Q32. 

Key words and phrases. Learning in games; FTRL dynamics; preference graph; resilience to aggregate deviations. We are deeply grateful to Josef Hofbauer for many fruitful and enlightening discussions, leading in particular to the counterexample of Section 5.2. We are likewise obliged to Oliver Biggar and Christos Papadimitriou for identifying and correcting a claim in an earlier version of this paper.                 

> 1arXiv:2608.13810v1 [cs.GT] 13 Aug 2026 2O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS
> (a) When preferences and behavior do not align. (b) When preferences and behavior do align.
> Figure 1: In each of these 2×2×2games, vertices are pure profiles and arrows indicate the direction of profitable unilateral deviations. The part of the graph that is highlighted in red is closed under better replies (club), so players have no
> preferential incentive to move away from these sets. Translating this intuition to the players’ dynamic behavior fails on the left: trajectories starting arbitrarily close to the top face drift away toward the bottom face, contradicting the pref-erential viewpoint. On the right the preferential and dynamical viewpoints are aligned: trajectories starting anywhere near the preferentially closed 6-edge cycle (highlighted in red) converge to it.

payoffs [18, 53], so correlations emerge endogenously as the dynamics unfold, prompting various forms of conflict and cooperation [21, 32, 43]. At the same time, this richness makes it difficult to characterize the dynamics’ asymptotic behavior in general finite games [3]: indeed, while strict Nash equilibria are precisely the locally stable and attracting points of regularized learning [18, 22, 26, 27, 46, 47], they need not govern global behavior, and in their absence learning may lead to recurrence or chaos [16, 37, 44, 45, 56, 57, 60, 65]. Even worse, several impossibility results rule out the existence of uncoupled dynamics that converge to Nash equilibrium in all games [7, 33, 58]. These considerations reveal that the relevant asymptotic objects are often set-valued , not necessarily pointwise. Accordingly, in lieu of asking when learning converges to a particular equilibrium, we ask which regions of the strategy space can arise as stable long-run outcomes, and how the structural features of the game affect them. Along these lines, a common modeling stance in game theory is that the primitive object of interest is the players’ preferences , whereas payoffs are merely a numerical representation thereof [12, 20, 48, 63]. Motivated by this viewpoint, Papadimitriou & Piliouras [64] conjectured that the attractors of the replicator dynamics—the continuous-time limit of exponential weights [36, 52, 71, 73]—are all determined by a directed graph encoding profitable unilateral deviations. This conjecture was made precise in subsequent work by Biggar & Shames [10], who, exploiting invariance properties of the replicator flow, showed that every attractor of the dynamics must contain certain “terminal components” of said graph. Nonetheless, even though this inclusion shows that preferences and learning are intimately linked, it does not yield sufficient predictive power; more precisely, it remains unclear which sets actually are stable outcomes of learning, and to what extent they can be characterized by the game’s preference structure alone. 

Our contributions in the context of related work. Our paper echoes a recent shift in perspec-tive by Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] to the effect that the “preferences only” intuition may fail 

in general: concretely, we show that, in a wide class of regularized learning dynamics, ordinal information need not determine stability, and the game’s actual payoff values can be essential for predicting the long-run behavior of the dynamics. This is particularly relevant in the THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 3

context of applications of game theory to reinforcement learning and machine learning, where a designer may need to instantiate numerical rewards in order to implement an intended 

ordinal specification—as in the case of preference learning [17, 30] or reward specification [2] for AI safety—and different cardinal realizations of the same ordering can lead to drastically different outcomes in the long run. In more detail, our paper aims to develop a theory for regularized dynamics that delineates when preferences do and do not pin down asymptotic outcomes, and how to recover stability and attraction when they do not. We do so through the game’s preference graph [12], the directed graph on pure profiles whose arcs encode the directions of (weakly) profitable unilateral deviations, and which therefore retains only ordinal incentive information. Our guiding premise is that, in spite of this deliberate minimality, preferences impose strong constraints on stable learning outcomes, prompting the following natural question: 

To what extent do player preferences determine the long-run behavior of their learning dynamics? 

Our results show that the preference graph places unavoidable restrictions on the stable outcomes of regularized learning while also identifying regimes in which ordinal information alone cannot determine such outcomes. Concretely: (1) For a broad class of dynamics, we show that the pure profiles contained in any asymptotically stable set—the skeleton of the set—must be closed under better replies 

(club), i.e., there are no profitable unilateral deviations leading outside this set. As a follow-up to this core result, we also show that every attractor must contain the full 

mixed region spanned by each connected set of pure profiles it contains. Thus, if the preference graph of the game is strongly connected, the dynamics of FTRL do not admit a proper attractor. (2) For subgames , we show that preferences do suffice: a subgame is asymptotically stable if and only if the subgame itself is closed under better replies, complementing in this way previous work by Ritzberger & Weibull [66] on the replicator dynamics, and more recent results by [10, 14] for stochastic variants of FTRL. As a special case, this also yields a sharp characterization of attractors in weakly acyclic games, extending results previously known only for potential games [54]. (3) Beyond subgames, we construct an example where a set of pure profiles is closed under better replies but its span is nevertheless unstable, even under full-support initialization, thus establishing that preferential and dynamical stability need not coincide under regularized learning. (4) Finally, we introduce the notion of sets that are resilient to aggregate deviations (rad), a payoff-based condition which guarantees asymptotic stability. This is a setwise generalization of pure Nash equilibrium and a cardinal refinement of closedness under better replies, and, to the best of our knowledge, it is the first such condition that applies to arbitrary games and arbitrary sets of pure strategies. All in all, the above can be seen as a preference-based toolbox for predicting the long-run behavior of regularized learning in games, clarifying in particular how the preference graph constrains —but does not always determine —the outcome of the dynamics. In this regard, our results should be compared and contrasted to the conjectured correspondence [64] between minimal club sets—also known as sink equilibria [28]—and minimal attractors of the replicator dynamics. Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] recently disproved this conjecture by showing that a sink equilibrium containing a “local source” cannot be an attractor of the replicator dynamics; they then conjectured that this condition is also necessary, i.e., any sink 4 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

equilibrium which is not an attractor of the replicator dynamics must contain a local source. Our counterexample disproves a more stringent version of this conjecture to the effect that the orbits of FTRL may drift away from a sink equilibrium which does not contain a pure 

local source; however, our example still contains a mixed local source, leaving the original conjecture open. 1

Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] also introduced a payoff-based sufficient condition for asymp-totic stability of sink equilibria in two-player games under the replicator dynamics. This condition does not directly extend to arbitrary numbers of players, in contrast to radness, which concerns arbitrary games and arbitrary sets of pure strategies. Finally, in concurrent work, Biggar & Papadimitriou [9] showed that the span of a club cycle in the preference graph (a cycle for which each vertex has a unique outgoing edge) is an attractor of the replicator dynamics. 2 This result intersects non-trivially with our own result on the asymptotic stability of rad sets: neither implies the other, and they can both be used to show the asymptotic stability of specific sink equilibria like the six-cycle of best responses in Jordan’s Matching Pennies game—which had only been established using fairly ad hoc techniques in the past [24]. This gives another instance where preferences are enough for dynamic stability, but also shows that a complete understanding of the attractors of learning in games remains elusive. 2. Preliminaries 

Game and strategies. We consider a finite normal-form game G, specified by a player set 

N = {1, . . . , n }, finite action sets Ai and payoff functions ui : A → R for each i ∈ N ,where A := Q 

> i∈N

Ai is the set of pure profiles. A pure action profile is denoted by 

α = ( α1, . . . , α n) ∈ A , and for a given player i we write α−i = ( αj )j̸ =i for the opponents’ component of α. In addition to pure actions, players may randomize over Ai. Accordingly, player i’s mixed strategy space is the simplex Xi = ∆( Ai), the set of probability distributions over Ai, and we write X := Q 

> i∈N

Xi for the set of mixed profiles x = ( x1, . . . , x n), which we call the game’s strategy space . For αi ∈ A i, the coordinate xiα denotes the probability assigned to αi by xi,and we set x−i = ( xj )j̸ =i. In addition, we write xα := Q 

> i∈N

xiα for the probability of pure profile α being played. We also use the notation X ◦ 

> i

for the relative interior of Xi (i.e., the set of mixed actions with full support) and similarly, X ◦ := Q 

> i

X ◦

> i

denote the relative interior of X . By a slight abuse of notation, we identify each pure action 

αi with the vertex eαi (i.e., the mixed strategy assigning probability 1 to αi), and likewise each pure profile α with the vertex eα. Finally, for xi ∈ X i and x ∈ X , we define the support :

supp( xi) := {αi ∈ A i : xiα ̸ = 0 }

and supp( x) := Q 

> i

supp( xi).

Payoff field and equilibria. The payoff functions extend multilinearly to mixed profiles via expectation under the product distribution induced by x:

ui(x) = X

> α∈A

xαui(α).

Denoting Yi := RAi and Y := Q 

> i∈N

Yi for the game’s payoff space , we consider the payoff field v : X → Y , defined componentwise by 

viα (x) = ui(αi, x −i), so that ⟨vi(x), x i⟩ = ui(x). 

> 1We are grateful to Oliver Biggar for pointing out this discrepancy in an earlier version of our paper.
> 2The first version of [9] appeared when the current paper was under review; it is also worth noting that the extension of the results of [9] to more general dynamics remains an open question. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 5

A B CA (0 , 0) (2 , 1) (1 , 2) B (1 , 2) (0 , 0) (2 , 1) C (2 , 1) (1 , 2) (0 , 0) 

(A , B) (A , C) (B , C) (B , A) (C , A) (C , B) (C , C) (A , A) (B , B) 

Figure 2: Payoffs and preferences in Shapley’s game [70]. The cycle of six profiles in the center—the “hexagon”—is the game’s unique proper club set; since it is minimal, it is a sink equilibrium. See Appendix B for more examples and details. 

Equivalently, since ui( · , x −i) is linear in xi, the vector vi(x) coincides with the gradient of 

ui with respect to xi:

vi(x) = ∇xi ui(x).

A profile x∗ ∈ X is a Nash equilibrium (NE) if no player can improve their payoff by a unilateral deviation from x∗, i.e., ui(x∗) ≥ ui(xi, x ∗−i) for all xi ∈ X i and all i ∈ N . A strict 

Nash equilibrium is a pure profile α∗ ∈ A such that each player strictly prefers α∗ 

> i

against 

α∗−i to any other pure action, namely ui(α∗) > u i(αi, α ∗−i) for all αi̸ = α∗ 

> i

.3. Preferences, learning and stability 

In this section, we define the basics of preference-based solution concepts and regularized learning in games. 3.1. Preference graphs and ordinal stability. We begin with some basics concerning the players’ preferences and related concepts. 

Preference graph. We encode ordinal incentives via the game’s preference graph . Its vertex set is A, and it contains an arc α → α′ whenever α and α′ differ only in a single player’s action (say player i, in which case α and α′ are i-comparable ) and the deviation is weakly profitable for i, i.e., ui(α′) ≥ ui(α). Thus, for each pure profile, the outgoing edges indicate which comparable profiles are preferred by each player, hence inducing a (partial) order on the pure profiles. If α → α′ and α′ → α we say there is a tie and we denote it α ↔ α′. It is clear that a game having no ties is a generic property, meaning it holds for an open dense subset of games. Put differently, one can always find an arbitrarily small perturbation of the game which resolves ties. 6 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Ordinal stability and connectedness. We now define the notion of “stability under unilateral improvements”. 

Definition 1. We say H ⊆ A is closed under better replies (club) if it has no outgoing arc to A \ H . Similarly, we say that H is closed under strict better replies (s-club) if it has no outgoing arc unless it’s a tie. Equivalently, a club set is stable under weakly profitable unilateral deviation: if α ∈ H 

and α → β then β ∈ H as well. Likewise, an s-club set is stable under strictly profitable 

unilateral deviations: if α ∈ H and α → β then either β ∈ H or β → α as well. For concision, we will say a club / s-club set is proper if it is a nonempty proper subset of A.We next turn from ordinal stability to a complementary structural feature: connectedness .

Definition 2. A set H ⊆ A is strongly connected if any two vertices in H can be joined by a directed path (a unilateral improvement path) that remains in H.A nonempty set of pure profiles which is both club and strongly connected is called a sink equilibrium , it is then also a minimal club set, that is, a nonempty club set which contains no proper club set. 

Spans, subgames and skeletons. Given any set of pure profiles H ⊆ A , we define its span as the region of mixed profiles supported on H, viz. 3

span( H) := {x ∈ X : xα = 0 for all α̸ ∈ H} 

A set B ⊆ A is a subgame if it has a product structure B = Q 

> i∈N

Bi with nonempty Bi ⊆ A i.Its span is then the corresponding face F = span( B) = Q 

> i∈N

∆( Bi). More generally, for any 

H ⊆ A , its span corresponds to the union of faces of the strategy space for which all vertices are in H. Finally, given a set S ⊆ X we define its skeleton skel( S) as the set of pure profiles it contains, i.e., 

skel( S) := S ∩ A .

For an illustration, cf. Figure 3. 

Remark 1. Note that skel is a left inverse of span in the sense that skel(span( H)) = H for all H ⊆ A . The converse, however, is not true: for example, span(skel( S)) = ∅ if S ⊆ ri X

is a set of fully mixed strategies. ✦

Remark 2. Importantly, a pure strategy profile α ∈ A is a pure (resp. strict ) Nash equilibrium 

if and only if {α} is s-club (resp. club). Note in particular the inversion of adjectives due to the “closedness” proviso in the definition of club / s-club sets. ✦

3.2. Regularized learning and dynamical stability. We continue with our basic learning model and related concepts. 

Regret and FTRL. A central benchmark for adaptive learning is the notion of regret . In our setting, given a trajectory of play x(t) ∈ X , t ≥ 0, we define the regret of player i ∈ N up to time T ≥ 0 as 

Reg i(T ) := max 

> αi∈A i

Z T

> 0

[ui(αi; x−i(t)) − ui(x(t))] dt 

i.e., as the difference between the player’s cumulative payoff up to time T and that of their best strategy in hindsight. We then say that the player incurs no regret if Reg i(T ) = o(T ).A broad and widely used family of no-regret dynamics is follow-the-regularized-leader 

(FTRL). The guiding principle of FTRL is that each player i maintains a vector of scores ,i.e., aggregate payoffs, and selects a mixed action by trading off these scores against a    

> 3This has also been called the content of the set [8, 10, 11]. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 7

Figure 3: Preference graphs of three 2 × 2 × 2 games. In each one, the red vertex set is a minimal club set / sink equilibrium, and the red region represent its span (an edge cycle on the left, a square face in the middle, and a union of two square faces on the right). 

regularization term that smoothens the dynamics and incentivizes exploration. Concretely, fix for each player i a regularizer hi : Xi → R ∪ { +∞} and define the associated choice map 

Qi : Yi → X i

Qi(yi) := arg max 

> xi∈X i

{⟨ yi, x i⟩ − hi(xi)}.

With this notation, the FTRL dynamics can be written for each player i as: 

˙yi(t) = vi(x(t)) 

| {z }

> aggregate payoffs

xi(t) = Qi(yi(t)) 

| {z }

> strategy update

. (FTRL) For the regularizer, we will assume for our purposes that it is decomposable , meaning that 

hi(xi) = X

> αi∈A i

θi(xiα ), θi : [0 , 1] → R,

where we call θi the kernel of hi. To streamline our presentation, we will assume throughout that θi is ( a) continuous on [0 , 1] ; ( b) C2-smooth on (0 , 1] ; and ( c) strongly convex , i.e., 

θ′′  

> i

(z) ≥ Ki for some Ki > 0 and for all z ∈ (0 , 1] . For consision, we will also write 

h := P 

> i∈N

hi for the aggregate regularizer and Q :=( Qi)i∈N : Y → X for the induced choice map. This regularization viewpoint yields clean regret guarantees. Indeed [42] proved that in continuous time, along any solution of (FTRL), player i’s regret is uniformly bounded by the range of the regularizer: 

∀T ≥ 0, Reg i(T ) ≤ max hi − min hi,

In this sense, the regularizer influences performance, but it also plays a second, equally important role: it determines the geometry of the induced learning dynamics via Q.

Strategy dynamics. We call hi steep if θ′

> i

(p) → −∞ as p ↓ 0. In that case the regularization cost becomes prohibitive near the boundary, so the regularized maximizer is always interior, that is, its image satisfies Im Qi = X ◦ 

> i

. By contrast, if hi is not steep, then boundary points may in general be selected and typically reached in finite time. For conciseness, we will say 

h is steep if hi is steep for every player. Two canonical regularizers illustrate this dichotomy: 

Example 3.1. For the entropic regularizer, with steep kernel θi(p) = p log p, the choice map is the softmax: 

Λi(yi) := exp( yiα )

P 

> βi∈A i

exp( yiβ )

!

> αi∈A i

.

which induces, in strategy space, the replicator dynamics 

˙xiα = xiα 

 viα (x) − ui(x). (RD) 8 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Example 3.2. At the other extreme, for the Euclidean regularizer, whose kernel θi(p) = 12 p2

is not steep, the choice map is the Euclidean projection into Xi:

Πi(yi) := arg min 

> xi∈X i

∥xi − yi∥22.

Hence, the induced dynamics are the piecewise-smooth projection dynamics [54], and are most transparently expressed on each fixed-support face: if xi(t) ∈ ∆( Bi)◦ for t in some interval, x(t) follows the projection dynamics 

˙xiα = viα (x) − 1

|B i|

X

> βi∈B i

viβ (x), αi ∈ B i. (PD) More generally, it is useful to eliminate the score variables and write the induced evolution directly in strategy space. On any time interval where player i’s support is Bi, let 

si := 1

θ′′ 

> i

and πiα (xi) := 



si(xiα )

P 

> γi∈B i

si(xiγ ) if αi ∈ B i,

0 otherwise. Then x(t) follows the strategy dynamics 

˙xiα = si(xiα ) viα (x) − ⟨ πi(xi), v i(x)⟩. (SD) Finally, fix the initial support B = supp( x(0)) and let F = span( B) be the corresponding face. If the regularizer is steep, the support never changes and trajectories remain in F◦ for all time. Thus, under some additional mild regularity assumptions on si, the facewise vector fields coincide on intersections of adjacent faces and therefore glue into a globally Lipschitz vector field on X . Hence the induced strategy dynamics are globally well-posed for all t ∈ R

and are face-invariant , meaning the support never changes along the dynamics. We call the resulting flow the strategy flow and denote it by (Θ t)t∈R (see Appendix E for more details). 

Dynamic stability and attraction. Informally, stability means that orbits starting sufficiently close to a set remain close to it for all time, while attraction means that trajectories starting nearby converge to said set. Formally: 

Definition 3. Let x(t) = Q(y(t)) be an orbit of (FTRL), and let S ⊆ X be a nonempty closed subset of X . Then: (1) S is ( Lyapunov ) stable if for every neighborhood U of S there exists a neighborhood 

V of S such that 

x(0) ∈ V ∩ Im Q =⇒ x(t) ∈ U for all t ≥ 0 .

(2) S is attracting if it admits a neighborhood U such that 

x(0) ∈ U ∩ Im Q =⇒ lim t→∞ dist( x(t), S ) = 0 .

(3) S is asymptotically stable if it is stable and attracting. As for the induced strategy flow (Θ t)t∈R of (SD), we shall work with the notion of attractor ,which is an invariant 4 asymptotically stable set (see Appendix C for precise definitions and related discussions concerning attractors). Importantly, for this strategy flow notion of attractor, we allow nearby initializations on all of X , including all adjacent faces, whereas for asymptotic stability under (FTRL), the only allowed initializations are on the image of the choice map (in particular, X ◦ for steep regularizers).           

> 4For the strategy flow, invariant means that S⊆ X satisfies Θt(S) = Sfor all t∈R.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 9

4. Implications of dynamic stability 

This section develops a systematic link between two levels of description: (1) combinatorial properties of subsets of the preference graph (ordinal stability notions), and (2) dynamical properties of regions of strategy space (dynamic stability notions). The guiding theme is that ordinal incentives, encoded by the preference graph, impose constraints on which regions of X can be long-run stable outcomes under regularized learning. All proofs are deferred to Appendix F. We start with the first connection, which is that attraction for the strategy flow forces no outgoing better replies: 

Proposition 1. Suppose that S ⊆ X is attracting under the strategy dynamics (SD) . Then its skeleton is club. 

The intuition behind this is that, under steep regularization, the dynamics (SD) are face-invariant, so starting on the 1-dimensional face spanned by two comparable vertices, the orbit stays on that segment, and the flow always follows the direction of the better reply. Outside the strategy flow regime, face-invariance is no longer available and we can no longer exploit initializations on proper subfaces of the strategy space. Nonetheless we are still able to prove, via new techniques utilizing the dual score representation of the dynamics, a strict version of the same result for stable sets, thereby showing that dynamical stability implies preferential stability. 

Theorem 1. Suppose that S ⊆ X is stable under (FTRL) . Then its skeleton is s-club. 

Indeed, even without face invariance, stability near a pure profile α rules out the existence of a strict better-reply α → α′ because one could initialize scores so that the opponents remain close to α long enough for player i’s score difference yiα ′ − yiα to grow linearly thanks to the strict payoff gap. Once this gap exceeds a certain carefully chosen regularizer-dependent threshold, the choice map shifts player i’s mixed action noticeably toward α′

> i

,pushing x(t) outside any prescribed small neighborhood of α, contradicting stability. Thus, the whole difficulty lies in choosing the right initializations so that player i, the deviating player, has enough time to move outside the prescribed neighborhood while the other players remain (almost) frozen during that time, exploiting in particular the fact that the dynamics have bounded speed in the space of scores Y.The next result shows that strong connectivity in the preference graph imposes a constraint on the shape of attractors. 

Theorem 2. If A ⊆ X is an attractor of the strategy dynamics (SD) and contains a strongly connected set H ⊆ A , then span( H) ⊆ A. Hence, if the preference graph is strongly connected, the flow admits no proper attractor. 5

This theorem is a consequence of a general principle: connectedness in the preference graph percolates to a corresponding notion of connectedness for the dynamics on the associated mixed region, which generalizes the second theorem of [10]. Formally, this is captured by 

chain transitivity , which intuitively means that one can move from any point to any other by following the flow for arbitrarily long stretches, allowing only arbitrarily small perturbations in between. We refer to Appendix E for precise definitions. In order to establish this principle, we proceed by induction, proving that if A contains all subfaces of a face, it must then contain the whole face as well, exploiting the fact that under the strategy flow, no asymptotically stable set can be fully contained in the interior [22].    

> 5Proper here means in the sense of being a strict subset, that is, the attractor is not all of X.10 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS

5. Implications of preferential stability 

The results of Section 4 show that asymptotic stability forces a range of closedness and stability properties on the preference graph of the game. We now ask when the converse holds for the natural geometric candidates arising from the graph, namely spans of pure profiles , that is, unions of faces of X . In words: 

When does preferential stability imply dynamic stability of the region that it spans, and when does it not? 

5.1. When preferences are enough. We begin with the simplest class of spans: those corresponding to a single face, i.e., spans of subgames, which can be written as B = Q 

> i∈N

Bi,with Bi ⊆ A i. In this case, preferential stability turns out to imply asymptotic stability: 

Theorem 3. If B ⊆ A is a club subgame, then span( B) is asymptotically stable under (FTRL) .

The proof (in Appendix G) relies on a recurring device in this section: constructing a suitable energy function which converts dissipativity in score space to asymptotic stability in strategy space. In the present case, the relevant energy is the Fenchel gap 

FB(y) := h∗(y) − h∗B(y),

where h∗ is the convex conjugate of h and h∗B(y) is its restriction to the face spanned by 

B. The Fenchel gap may be viewed as a “dual” measure of distance to span( B), since it is always nonnegative and vanishes exactly when Q(y) ∈ span( B). If B is a club set, then in a neighborhood of span( B) every action outside B is uniformly worse than some action inside B, yielding a differential inequality showing that FB decreases at a rate proportional to the total probability mass of playing outside B, or, equivalently, to the ℓ1 distance to its span. Therefore, the dynamics exhibit a sharp inward drift toward span( B), which implies attraction and stability. Importantly, this energy function works even for regularizers that may be not steep, which makes it a substantial improvement over recent prior approaches [13, 14]. Now, combining the two theorems above with the results of Section 4, we obtain the following strong equivalences: 

Corollary 1. Let B ⊆ A be a subgame and assume the game has no ties. Then B is club if and only if span( B) is asymptotically stable under (FTRL) .

Corollary 2. Let B ⊆ A be a subgame. Then B is club if and only if span( B) is an attractor of the strategy dynamics (SD) .

Note that these results are setwise generalizations of the pointwise version, which has been sometimes called “the folk theorem of evolutionary game theory” in the literature [51, 53, 67], and says that a point is asymptotically stable if and only if it is a strict Nash equilibrium [22]. Indeed, any strict equilibrium is a vertex of the preference graph with no outgoing edge, and therefore a singleton club subgame. We next illustrate how these equivalences specialize in games where better-reply paths always lead to equilibrium. This is the reachability notion of weak acyclicity , introduced by Young [74]. 

Definition 4. A game is weakly acyclic if for every α ∈ A there exists a finite path of better replies 

α = α0 → α1 → · · · → αk

ending at a pure Nash equilibrium αk.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 11 

Remark 3. Note that weakly acyclic games are a generalization of the widely studied class of potential games , and more generally ordinal potential games , introduced by Monderer & Shapley [59], which are equivalent to acyclic games, games whose preference graph admits no directed cycles. ✦

Applying our results to the class of weakly acyclic games, we obtain a sharp characterization of minimal attractors . 6

Corollary 3. If the game is weakly acyclic and has no ties, then M ⊆ X is a minimal attractor of the strategy dynamics (SD) if and only if M is a strict NE. 

An important application of this result follows from Johnston et al. [38], who show that, in the regime of many players relative to the maximal number of actions per player, weak acyclicity becomes overwhelmingly likely: among games admitting at least one pure Nash equilibrium, the probability of being weakly acyclic converges to 1 at an exponential rate in the number of players. Consequently, for such “typical” large games with a pure Nash equilibrium, Corollary 3 guarantees, under the strategy flow, that all minimal attractors coincide with strict Nash equilibria. This gives theoretical insight as to why FTRL seems in practice to work well with games with many players but (relatively) few actions. 5.2. When preferences are not enough. The preceding results rely crucially on the product structure of subgames. When H ⊆ A is not a subgame, preferential stability of H may fail to control the dynamic stability of its span. The next proposition makes this separation explicit. 

Proposition 2. There is a 2 × 2 × 2 game with a unique proper club set H for which span( H)

is not stable under (FTRL) .

The game in question is represented in Figure 1a, where H is the set of red vertices, and its span S = span( H) is the union of the top, right and back faces. One can observe that, near the center of the top face, the third player has an incentive to deviate toward the bottom face, which is not included in S; this occurs “before” the other two players can move toward another face of S, thus rendering it unstable. In fact, in this example, the minimal attractor containing H is not even a span of pure profiles (cf. Remark G.1). The center of the top face is also a (mixed) local source in the sense of Biggar & Papadimitriou [8], so this instability result is consistent with the corresponding higher-dimensional example of [8]. In our example though, the escape happens from full-support initializations and under every instance of (FTRL), whereas the analysis of [8] only concerns (RD) (see Remark G.2 for more details). 

Remark 4. Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] conjectured that a sink equilibrium which is unstable under the replicator dynamics must contain a local source. The counterexample of Proposi-tion 2 exhibits a dynamically unstable sink equilibrium without a pure local source, showing that the conjecture of Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] cannot be strengthened to positing the existence of pure local sources. ✦

6. Recovering dynamic stability 

Proposition 2 shows that preferential information alone may be too coarse to determine dynamic stability: recovering it requires a fortiori additional information, such as payoff values. For this reason, we introduce a natural and simple payoff-dependent condition which restores stability.  

> 6Here, minimal is in the sense of set inclusion, that is, attractors which contain no proper attractor. 12 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS

Definition 5. Given α, β ∈ A , we define the payoff flux from β to α as 

Φ( β, α ) := X

> i∈N

(ui(αi, β −i) − ui(β)) . (2) Given H ⊆ A , we say that H is resilient to aggregate deviations (rad) if 

Φ( β, α ) ≤ 0 for all β ∈ H and all α / ∈ H ,

and we say that it is strictly resilient to aggregate deviations (s-rad) if the above inequalities are strict. We similarly extend the notion of the payoff flux to mixed strategies by setting, for 

x, x ′ ∈ X ,

Φ( x, x ′) := X

> i∈N

(ui(x′

> i

, x −i) − ui(x)) .

The summand ui(αi, β −i) − ui(β) is the instantaneous gain to player i from deviating unilaterally to αi at β, so Φ( β, α ) aggregates these gains along the target profile α. The notion of s-radness therefore means that every outside profile α / ∈ H is unappealing in aggregate against every β ∈ H . This property depends on payoff magnitudes, which correspond naturally to the weights of the preference graph: if α → β are i-comparable, the weight of that edge is ui(β) − ui(α). Moreover, from a graph-theoretic perspective, Φ( β, α ) is obtained by summing the signed weights of edges moving one step (i.e., a unilateral deviation) from β toward α. Importantly, this notion of radness provides a cardinal strengthening of ordinal closure. 

Proposition 3. Let H be a subset of A. If H is rad (resp. s-rad ), then H is s-club (resp. club ).

The diagram below summarizes the chain of implications chain between club / s-club and rad / s-rad sets: rad =⇒ s-club 

~ww~ww

s-rad =⇒ club Specifically, in games without ties, club and s-club sets coincide, whereas rad and s-rad sets need not. Moreover, by Remark 2, rad / s-club singletons and pure Nash equilibria all coincide , and likewise for s-rad / club singletons and strict Nash equilibria. Thus, when there are no ties, all of them are equivalent for singletons. Hence, radness provides a setwise 

cardinal generalization of the notion of pure Nash equilibria, just as closedness under better replies provides its setwise ordinal counterpart. As for complexity, it is also clear that radness can be checked in O(|N | |H| |A \ H| ) steps given H. Moreover, one can find a rad set in O(|N | |A| 2) time as follows: define the directed graph GΦ on vertex set A with an arc β → α if and only if Φ( β, α ) > 0 (resp. Φ( β, α ) ≥ 0

for strict rad). Then H is rad if and only if it has no outgoing arcs in GΦ, i.e., if and only if there is no edge β → α with β ∈ H and α / ∈ H . Constructing GΦ requires computing all payoff fluxes between pure profiles, which takes O(|N | |A| 2) time, and finding a subset with no outgoing edge is O(|A| 2) (via standard graph decomposition algorithms, e.g., [72]), hence the total complexity is O(|N | |A| 2). Thus, given access to the payoff table, radness can be tested and found with a polynomial number of payoff queries in the size of the explicit normal-form representation. This stands in sharp contrast with the convex relaxation of the notion of a pure Nash equilibria, namely mixed Nash equilibria. Despite being the most widely studied solution concept in finite games, non-pure, mixed Nash equilibria are computationally hard: in the same normal-form payoff-table model, computing one is well known to be PPAD -hard THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 13 

Figure 4: A game with an s-rad set (for the game’s payoffs, cf. Appendix B). On the left, we plot the game’s preference graph, highlighting the s-rad set (and its span) in red; on the right, we plot the evolution of the replicator dynamics in said game. We note that the (span of) the s-rad set is asymptotically stable, as per Theorem 4. At the same time, we also note that all replicator orbits eventually converge to the rightmost face, a face which is neither rad (even though it is contained in the original s-rad set), nor asymptotically stable (an orbit may start arbitrarily close to said face and venture arbitrarily far before eventually returning to it, cf. the red orbit in the plot to the right). 

[19]. They are moreover dynamically unappealing: they are never asymptotically stable under regularized learning [22]. In comparison, the setwise relaxation of s-radness recovers asymptotic stability of the entire span: 

Theorem 4. Suppose that H ⊆ A is s-rad. Then span( H) is an attractor of the strategy dynamics (SD) .

The proof (which we present in Appendix H) is based on the construction of an energy function adapted to general spans, defined by 

¯FH(y) := X 

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ) (3) with the convention e−∞ = 0 , where Fh(x, y ) := h(x) + h∗(y) − ⟨ y, x ⟩ is the Fenchel coupling ,a primal-dual divergence between strategies and scores. In the steep case, along any (FTRL) orbit x(t) = Q(y(t)) , we have Fh(α, y (t)) → +∞ if and only if xα(t) → 0, hence the energy vanishes exactly on span( H). Additionally, the time-derivative of this energy along the same orbit is given by 

ddt ¯FH(y(t)) = X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α, y (t)) Φ( x(t), α ),

so the dynamics are dissipative near the s-rad set. We conclude with a refinement of this result for the replicator dynamics: 

Theorem 5. Let H be a rad club subset of A. Then span( H) is an attractor of the replicator dynamics (RD) .

This result implies in particular, when combined with Proposition 3, that in any game with no ties, the span of every rad set is asymptotically stable under the replicator dynamics. The proof (in Appendix H) relies on a strikingly simple energy function: it is given by the total outside mass under the strategy profile x

¯WH(x) := X

> α / ∈H

xα.14 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS  

> Figure 5: Four games with the same preference graph, differing at only a single payoff entry. As we move from left to right, the dynamics become progressively more complicated and orbits converge to different faces, despite having the same preference graph.

It is nonnegative and vanishes exactly on span( H). Along the replicator dynamics, the product rule gives 

˙xα = xα

X

> i∈N

 viα (x) − ui(x) = xαΦ( x, α ),

so, by the multilinearity of Φ( ·, α ), we get: 

ddt ¯WH(x(t)) = X

> α / ∈H

X

> β∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α )+ X

> α / ∈H

X

> β / ∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α ) .

The first sum is nonpositive by radness, while the second is O( ¯WH(x)2). To get strict negativity near span( H), fix x∗ ∈ span( H) and let B = supp( x∗) ⊆ H . For every minimal profile α / ∈ H , in the deviation order, that can appear when moving out of B, clubness gives a neighboring profile β(α) ∈ H with Φ( β(α), α ) < 0, uniformly over such α. Hence the first sum contains a strictly negative contribution of the form P 

> α

xαxβ(α)Φ( β(α), α ), which dominates the second sum close to span( H). This ultimately gives ddt ¯WH(x(t)) < 0 whenever 

x(t) is sufficiently close to, but not in, span( H), hence ¯WH is a local energy for the span. Some intriguing examples of club sets in the literature are ( a) the 6-cycle in Jordan’s Matching Pennies [39] (Figure 1b); and ( b) the hexagon in Shapley’s game [70] (Figure 2). These sets are both club and rad, but they are not s-rad (cf. Appendix B.2). Importantly, existing proofs of asymptotic stability for these sets under the replicator dynamics [24, 40] rely on essentially ad hoc arguments tailored to those games. It thus remains open to identify a general game-theoretic principle that could explain, beyond these special cases, the emergence of apparently coordinated outcomes under myopic, uncoupled adaptive behavior. As far as we are aware, radness provides the first general explanation for this form of stability under regularized learning. 7. Concluding remarks 

Putting everything together, our analysis shows that the preference structure of a game provides a simple combinatorial blueprint which constrains the stable outcomes of regularized learning, but is not enough to determine it. Moreover, although radness provides a natural sufficient condition for asymptotic stability, it is not necessary in general (cf. the last example in Appendix B). It is therefore an open question whether asymptotically stable sets admit a straightforward characterization in terms of payoff conditions that can be checked at the level of pure strategies. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 15 

Finally, while our results concern attractors, a full account of the players’ limiting behavior remains elusive: for example, Figure 5 shows four games with the same preference graph and no proper attractors, but markedly different limiting behaviors. A plausible conjecture is that any asymptotically stable limit set of the replicator dynamics—or FTRL—must be contained in the boundary of the game’s strategy space [50]; however, this likely requires new ideas, which we intend to pursue in future work. 

Acknowledgments 

> This research was supported in part by the French National Research Agency (ANR) in the framework of the PEPR IA FOUNDRY project (ANR-23-PEIA-0003). PM is also a member of the Archimedes Research Unit/Athena RC, and was partially supported by project MIS 5154714 of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan Greece 2.0 funded by the European Union under the NextGenerationEU Program. We would also like to thank the IRP FAIRGAME of the CNRS for supporting this project.

Appendix A. Further related work 

The study of attractors of the replicator dynamics originates in evolutionary game theory, where the replicator equation was introduced as a model of evolutionary selection [35, 67, 73]. Already in this literature, the long-run behavior of learning was understood to be set-valued, and a seminal contribution in this direction is due to Ritzberger & Weibull [66], who studied the asymptotic stability of faces under evolutionary dynamics and showed that subgames closed under better replies induce attracting faces, which is Theorem 3 for the special case of the replicator. These questions later became central for learning in games. The replicator dynamics are the continuous-time limit of exponential weights [36, 71], while exponential weights is one of the few quintessential no-regret algorithm [15]. More generally, regularized dynamics, such as FTRL, provide a common, unified framework for no-regret learning [34, 53, 68]. Thus, the question of identifying attractors of the replicator naturally extends to the broader question of identifying the stable long-run outcomes of regularized learning dynamics. For special classes of games, the picture is relatively well understood. In zero-sum and adversarial settings, regularized learning typically cycles rather than converges [56]. For zero-sum games, [11] showed that the span of the sink equilibrium is the unique global attractor of the replicator dynamics. Moreover, [44, 45] showed that harmonic games, a generalization of zero-sum games with interior equilibria, are Poincaré recurrent in the interior under FTRL, and therefore admit no proper attractor. By contrast, in potential games, the potential acts as a Lyapunov function, yielding convergence to Nash equilibria under broad classes of game dynamics [54]. Outside such structured classes, the long-run behavior of learning in finite games remains poorly understood. A recent line of work studies this problem through the preference graph of the game. Papadimitriou & Piliouras [64] conjectured that, for the replicator dynamics, minimal attractors should exist and should correspond to sink equilibria of the preference graph. Biggar & Shames [10] proved that minimal attractors do exist and always contain sink equilibria. They also proved, for the replicator dynamics, a weaker form of Lemma F.2: any chain transitive set which contains a strongly connected set of pure profiles also contains its span. In the same paper, they also showed that club subgames are attracting for the replicator dynamics, essentially recovering the same result of Ritzberger & Weibull [66]. This had already been extended prior to discrete-time FTRL by [13]. However, as noted by [14], their proof contains a gap: the energy function used there does not generally induce neighborhoods of club faces, and hence does not by itself establish asymptotic stability. The 16 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

energy of [14], based on the Bregman divergence, fixes this for steep regularizers (where they work with a stochastic version of continuous-time FTRL), while ours (the Fenchel gap) allows to prove the result for both steep and non-steep regularizers in continuous-time. 

Appendix B. Preference graphs 

We recall that the preference graph has vertex set A and an arc α → α′ whenever the two profiles are i-comparable for some player i ∈ N (i.e. α−i = α′−i) with ui(α′) ≥ ui(α).B.1. Sink equilibria. Note that, given any directed graph, we can decompose its set of vertices into a disjoint union of strongly connected components (SCCs), which are strongly connected sets that admit no strongly connected superset. Given now such a decomposition, there will always exists among them some components which have no outgoing edge, known as sink strongly connected components (sink SCCs). When applied to the preference graph, these sink SCCs have been called the sink equilibria 

of the game [12]. They are therefore nonempty subsets of pure profiles which are both closed under better replies and strongly connected in the preference graph. Equivalently, they are also nonempty minimal club sets, that is, club sets that contain no proper club set. Thus, once a better-reply path enters a sink equilibrium, it can keep moving within it, but it cannot leave it. In this sense, sink equilibrium represent the terminal “basins” of the ordinal deviation structure. This interpretation is also reflected by a probabilistic viewpoint [31, 62, 64] : consider a random walk on A whose transitions P follow the preference edges, i.e. P (α, α ′) > 0 if and only if α → α′. An interpretation of such dynamics is that, at each turn, given we are on a pure profile α, we pick a random player who has one or many profitable deviations from 

α, who in turn picks at random such a deviation. Then, the classical ergodic theorem on Markov chains shows that the recurrent classes of this chain coincide with the sink SCCs of the preference graph, i.e. the sink equilibria, and every invariant probability measure π is therefore supported on the union of sink equilibria. B.2. Examples. We now illustrate this with some example. In each case, the preference graph is drawn on the left, and the payoff table is given on the right. The sink equilibria vertices are colored red, and their spans are red as well.      

> (C ,C) (C ,D) (D ,D) (D ,C)

C DC (3 , 3) (0 , 5) D (5 , 0) (1 , 1)  

> Figure 6: Prisoner’s Dilemma

This is the well known Prisoner’s Dilemma . The preference graph is acyclic: all paths flow to (D , D) , which is a sink vertex, and therefore the unique strict Nash equilibrium. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 17 

(H , H) (H , T) (T , T) (T , H) 

H TH (1 , −1) (−1, 1) T (−1, 1) (1 , −1) 

Figure 7: Matching Pennies 

This is the Matching Pennies game. It is a zero-sum game, and its preference graph forms a directed 4–cycle, hence the graph is strongly connected and the unique club set is the whole graph. 

(A , A) (A , B) (B , B) (B , A) 

A BA (1 , 1) (0 , 0) B (0 , 0) (1 , 1) 

Figure 8: A coordination game. 

The preference graph is acyclic and has two sink vertices, (A , A) and (B , B) , so the game has two strict Nash equilibria (and hence two singleton club sets), corresponding to the two coordinated outcomes. 

Front 

L RT (1 , 0, 1) (0 , 1, 1) B (0 , 1, 1) (1 , 0, 1) 

Back 

L RT (−1, 1, 0) (1 , 0, 0) B (1 , 0, 0) (−1, 1, 0) 

Figure 9: A cube with a club square. 

A 2 × 2 × 2 game, for which we represent pure profiles as the vertices of a cube. Player 1 choses to play top or bottom, player 2 left or right and player 3 front or back. Edges carry arrows for profitable unilateral deviations. The 2 × 2 subgame where the third player plays front only is closed under better replies. 18 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Front 

L RT (2 , −1, 1) (0 , 1, 1) B (−2, −2, −2) (1 , 1, −1) 

Back 

L RT (1 , 0, −1) (1 , −1, 0) B (−2, −2, 0) (−2, 0, 1)  

> Figure 10: A game with a s-rad set.

A 2 × 2 × 2 game with a s-rad sink equilibrium. Indeed let H be that sink, a direct computation yields, Φ( β, α ) ≤ − 1 < 0 for all α / ∈ H and all β ∈ H .

Front 

L RT (−1, −1, −1) (−1, 1, 1) B (1 , 1, −1) (1 , −1, 1) 

Back 

L RT (1 , −1, 1) (1 , 1, −1) B (−1, 1, 1) (−1, −1, −1)  

> Figure 11: Jordan’s Matching Pennies

This game, known as Jordan’s Matching Pennies , was introduced by Jordan [39] and studied in [24] as a compact, explicit instance in which adaptive play can fail to converge to Nash equilibrium and instead exhibits persistent cycling concentrated on the red 6-cycle (the span of the sink equilibrium). It also provides a minimal example where long-run behavior is naturally described by sink equilibria rather than Nash equilibria [40]. Now, let H denote the sink equilibrium of Jordan’s Matching Pennies (the six red vertices in the previous figure). Here A \ H = {(T , L, F) , (B , R, B) }, and a direct computation gives 

Φ( β, α ) ∈ { 0, −2} for all such α / ∈ H and β ∈ H . Hence H is rad but not s-rad. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 19 

(A , B) (A , C) (B , C) (B , A) (C , A) (C , B) (C , C) (A , A) (B , B) 

A B CA (0 , 0) (2 , 1) (1 , 2) B (1 , 2) (0 , 0) (2 , 1) C (2 , 1) (1 , 2) (0 , 0) 

Figure 12: Shapley’s game. 

Shapley’s classical 3 × 3 example [70] is historically important as (one of) the first explicit demonstrations that learning can fail to converge to Nash equilibrium in two-player non-zero-sum games, where it was shown specifically for the fictitious play scheme [41]. Let H := {(i, j ) : i̸ = j} be the sink equilibrium of Shapley’s game (the red hexagon in the previous figure). Its span is exactly this directed cycle (union of one-dimensional faces). For α = ( k, k ) /∈ H and β = ( i, j ) ∈ H ,

Φ( β, α ) =  u1(k, j ) − u1(i, j ) +  u2(i, k ) − u2(i, j ).

If k = i then u1(k, j ) = u1(i, j ) and u2(i, k ) = u2(i, i ) = 0 , so Φ( β, α ) = −u2(i, j ) ∈{− 1, −2} < 0. If k = j similarly Φ( β, α ) = −u1(i, j ) ∈ {− 1, −2} < 0. If k /∈ { i, j },then u1(i, j ) + u2(i, j ) = 3 and also u1(k, j ) + u2(i, k ) = 3 , hence Φ( β, α ) = 0 . Therefore 

Φ( β, α ) ≤ 0 for all α / ∈ H , β ∈ H , so H is rad, but it is not s-rad since equality occurs (e.g. 

α = (A , A) and β ∈ { (B , C) , (C , B) }).          

> (A ,A) (A ,B) (B ,A) (B ,B) (C ,A) (C ,B)

A BA (0 , 0) (0 , 5) B (−1, 3) (1 , 0) C (−3, 0) (−2, 1) 

Figure 13: A club subgame which is not rad. 20 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

The club subgame is B = {A, B} × { A, B}. Nonetheless, B is not rad: with β = (A , A) ∈ B 

and α = (C , B) /∈ B ,

Φ( β, α ) = ( u1(C , A) − u1(A , A)) + ( u2(A , B) − u2(A , A)) = ( −3 − 0) + (5 − 0) = 2 > 0. (B.1) Since club subgames are asymptotically stable, this shows radness is not necessary for asymptotic stability. 

Appendix C. Attractors and chain transitivity 

We collect here standard notions from dynamical systems used throughout this paper, see e.g. [1, 67]. Let X be a compact subset of Rd. We shall consider a flow , which is a continuous map 

ϕ : R × X → X such that 

ϕ0 = Id X , ϕt+s = ϕt ◦ ϕs ∀ s, t ∈ R.

We write ϕt(x0) for the state at time t starting from x0 ∈ X. All flows in this paper arise from (globally) well-posed ODEs of the form ˙x = f (x), where f : X → Rd is Lipschitz continuous. C.1. Attractors. A set A ⊆ X is forward-invariant if ϕt(A) ⊆ A for all t ≥ 0, and invariant 

if ϕt(A) = A for all t ∈ R. A point x∗ ∈ X is stationary if ϕt(x∗) = x∗ for all t ≥ 0. Let 

S ⊆ X be nonempty and closed and let N (S) denote the family of neighborhoods of S, then: 

• Stability. S is stable if for every U ∈ N (S) there exists V ∈ N (S) with 

x ∈ V =⇒ ϕt(x) ∈ U ∀ t ≥ 0.

• Attraction. S is attracting if there exists U ∈ N (S) such that 

x ∈ U =⇒ dist( ϕt(x), S ) −−−→ 

> t→∞

0.

Any such U is a basin of attraction of S.

• Asymptotic stability. S is asymptotically stable if it is both stable and attracting. A nonempty, compact, invariant set A ⊆ X is an attractor if there exists U ∈ N (A) with 

lim  

> t→∞

sup 

> x∈U

dist( ϕt(x), A ) = 0 .

Equivalently, A is an attractor if and only if there exists an open, forward-invariant trapping region B and t0 > 0 such that ϕt(cl B) ⊂ B for all t ≥ t0 and A = T 

> t≥0

ϕt(B). In particular, every attractor is asymptotically stable, and any compact, invariant and asymptotically stable set is an attractor [67]. If A is an attractor with trapping region B, the dual repellor is 

A∗ := \

> t< 0

ϕt

 X \ B,

which is an attractor for the time-reversed flow ψt := ϕ−t and satisfies A ∩ A∗ = ∅. Finally, we cite the following useful lemmas: 

Lemma C.1. Let A ⊆ X be an attractor, let K ⊆ X be nonempty, compact and invariant and assume A ∩ K̸ = ∅. Then A ∩ K is an attractor for the restricted flow ϕ|K : R × K → K.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 21 

C.2. Chain transitivity. For ε, T > 0, an (ε, T )–chain from x to y is a finite sequence 

x = x0, x 1, . . . , x k = y, t0, . . . , t k−1 ≥ T, 

such that dist( ϕtj (xj ), x j+1 ) < ε for all j ∈ { 0, . . . , k − 1}. There is a pseudo-orbit from x

to y (denoted x ⇝ y) if for every ε, T > 0 there exists an (ε, T )–chain from x to y. Note that pseudo-orbits cannot leave, but may enter, attractors—and pseudo-orbits may leave, but cannot enter a repellor. With this we can define the notion of chain transitivity . A nonempty compact set K ⊆ X

is internally chain transitive for the flow ϕ if it is invariant and, for every x, y ∈ K, x ⇝ y

for the flow restricted to K. We now mention the following alternative definition, due to [6]: 

Proposition C.1. Let K ⊆ X be nonempty and compact, then K is internally chain transitive if and only if K is invariant and the flow restricted to K admits no proper attractor. 

Appendix D. Regularizers and choice maps 

Throughout, fix a player i ∈ N and write Xi = ∆( Ai), Yi = RAi , ⟨· , ·⟩ for the standard pairing on Yi × Y i, and 1 ∈ Y i for the all-ones vector. We view hi : Xi → R ∪ { +∞} as an extended-real convex function on Yi by setting hi(xi) = + ∞ for xi /∈ X i. We assume throughout that hi is decomposable , continuous and smooth on the interior :

hi(xi) = X

> αi∈A i

θi(xiα ), θi : [0 , 1] → R, θi ∈ C0([0 , 1]) , θi ∈ C2((0 , 1]) .

We will moreover assume that there exists a constant Ki > 0 such that 

θ′′  

> i

(p) ≥ Ki ∀ p ∈ (0 , 1] . (D.1) As a consequence, hi is Ki-strongly convex on Xi (with respect to ∥ · ∥ 2), i.e. for all xi, x ′ 

> i

∈ X i

and all t ∈ (0 , 1] ,

hi

 (1 − t)xi + tx ′

> i

 ≤ (1 − t)hi(xi) + th i(x′

> i

) − Ki

2 t(1 − t) ∥xi − x′

> i

∥22.

Finally, recall from the main text that hi is steep if θ′

> i

(p) → −∞ as p ↓ 0.D.1. Choice maps. The convex conjugate of hi is 

h∗ 

> i

(yi) := sup 

> xi∈X i

{⟨ yi, x i⟩ − hi(xi)}, yi ∈ Y i,

and the regularized choice map (also known as the mirror map ) is 

Qi(yi) := arg max 

> xi∈X i

{⟨ yi, x i⟩ − hi(xi)}.

By strong convexity, the maximizer is unique, so Qi : Yi → X i is single-valued. We shall also consider the subdifferential of hi at xi ∈ X i:

∂h i(xi) := 

n

gi ∈ Y i : hi(wi) ≥ hi(xi) + ⟨gi, w i − xi⟩ ∀wi ∈ X i

o

,

and we write dom ∂h i := {xi ∈ X i : ∂h i(xi)̸ = ∅} and Im Qi = Qi(Yi) for the image of Qi,also known as the prox-domain .Under our assumptions, the choice map enjoys the following properties: 

Proposition D.1. For each i ∈ N :(1) h∗ 

> i

is C1 on Yi and Qi = ∇h∗ 

> i

, in particular Qi is Lipschitz continuous. (2) Im Qi = dom ∂h i.(3) For all c ∈ R, Qi(yi + c 1) = Qi(yi).(4) If yki ∈ Y i satisfies ykiα − ykiβ → −∞ for some α̸ = β, then Qiα (yki ) → 0.22 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

(5) For x = Q(y) there exist λi ∈ R and νi ∈ RAi 

> +

such that, for all αi ∈ A i,

yiα = θ′

> i

(xiα ) + λi − νiα ,

and if xiα ̸ = 0 , then νiα = 0 .Proof. See [53]. ■

Lemma D.1. If hi is steep, then Im Qi = X ◦ 

> i

.Proof. Direct consequence of Proposition D.1(2), see [53]. ■

Proposition D.2. If hi is steep, then, for all yi, y ′ 

> i

∈ Y i,

Qi(yi) = Qi(y′

> i

) ⇐⇒ ∃ c ∈ R : y′ 

> i

= yi + c 1 .

Equivalently, the restriction of Qi to the quotient space Yi/span {1} is injective. Proof. Let xi := Qi(yi) = Qi(y′

> i

) ∈ X ◦ 

> i

. Since xi is interior, by Proposition D.1(5) 

yiα − θ′

> i

(xiα ) = λ, y′ 

> iα

− θ′

> i

(xiα ) = λ′, ∀ αi ∈ A i.

Subtracting gives y′ 

> iα

− yiα = λ′ − λ for all αi, hence y′ 

> i

− yi = c 1 with c := λ′ − λ. Conversely, if y′ 

> i

= yi + c 1, then Qi(y′

> i

) = Qi(yi) by Proposition D.1(3). ■

D.2. Bregman divergence and Fenchel coupling. Fix pi ∈ X i and define the face-neighborhood 

of pi by 

∆pi := {xi ∈ X i : supp( xi) ⊇ supp( pi)}.

For xi ∈ ∆pi , the segment xi + t(pi − xi) stays in Xi for all sufficiently small t ↓ 0. We therefore define the (one-sided) directional derivative 

h′

> i

(xi; zi) := lim 

> t↓0

hi(xi + tz i) − hi(xi)

t , zi ∈ Y i with xi + tz i ∈ X i for small t > 0,

and the (extended) Bregman divergence by 

Di(pi, x i) := hi(pi) − hi(xi) − h′

> i

(xi; pi − xi), xi ∈ ∆pi . (D.2) If xi ∈ X ◦ 

> i

then hi is differentiable at xi and h′

> i

(xi; pi − xi) = ⟨∇ hi(xi), p i − xi⟩, so (D.2) reduces to the usual Bregman divergence. The associated Fenchel coupling is 

Fi(pi, y i) := hi(pi) + h∗ 

> i

(yi) − ⟨ yi, p i⟩, (pi, y i) ∈ X i × Y i,

and for profiles p ∈ X , y ∈ Y , we set Fh(p, y ) := P 

> i∈N

Fi(pi, y i).

Proposition D.3. Assume hi is Ki-strongly convex on Xi w.r.t. ∥ · ∥ . Then, for all pi ∈ X i

and yi ∈ Y i:(1) Fi(pi, y i) ≥ Ki

2 ∥Qi(yi) − pi∥2.(2) Fi(pi, y ki ) → 0 if and only if Qi(yki ) → pi.(3) If xi = Qi(yi) ∈ ∆pi , then Fi(pi, y i) = Di(pi, x i).Proof. See [53]. ■

In particular, Fi(pi, y i) = 0 if and only if pi = Qi(yi). Thus the Fenchel coupling acts as a kind of primal-dual distance between strategies and scores. 

Lemma D.2. Let x = Q(y) be a solution orbit of (FTRL) . Then for every fixed pi ∈ X i,

ddt Fi(pi, y i) = ⟨vi(x), x i − pi⟩.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 23 

Proof. By Proposition D.1(1), ∇h∗ 

> i

= Qi. Hence, by the chain rule, 

ddt Fi(pi, y i) = ∇h∗ 

> i

(yi), ˙yi − ⟨ ˙yi(t), p i⟩ = ˙yi, Q i(yi) − pi .

Using Qi(yi) = xi and ˙yi = vi(x) yields the claim. ■

D.3. Examples of regularizers. We give here some examples of standard regularizers [5, 13, 53, 68] which verify our assumptions. Recall si(p) := 1 /θ ′′  

> i

(p).

Example D.1 (Entropy) . Let θi(p) = p log p for p ∈ [0 , 1] (with the convention 0 log 0 = 0 ). Then 

θ′′  

> i

(p) = 1

p ≥ 1 (p ∈ (0 , 1]) ,

so (D.1) holds with Ki = 1 and si(p) = p. The regularizer is steep and the choice map is the softmax 

Qi(yi) = Λ i(yi) := exp( yiα )

P 

> βi∈A i

exp( yiβ )

!

> αi∈A i

, h∗ 

> i

(yi) = log 

 X 

> βi∈A i

exp( yiβ )



.

On ∆pi , the Bregman divergence is the Kullback–Leibler divergence , or relative entropy :

Di(pi, x i) = X

> αi∈A i

piα log piα 

xiα 

= DKL (pi∥xi).

Example D.2 (Euclidean) . Let θi(p) = 12 p2. Then θ′′  

> i

(p) = 1 , so (D.1) holds with Ki = 1 and 

si(p) = 1 . The regularizer is non-steep and 

Qi(yi) = Π i(yi) := arg min 

> xi∈X i

∥xi − yi∥22.

Moreover, 

h∗ 

> i

(yi) = sup 

> xi∈X i



⟨yi, x i⟩ − 12 ∥xi∥22



= 12 ∥yi∥22 − 12 dist( yi, Xi)2,

and on X ◦ 

> i

one has Di(pi, x i) = 12 ∥pi − xi∥22.

Example D.3 (Square-root) . Let θi(p) = −4√p on [0 , 1] . Then 

θ′′  

> i

(p) = p−3/2 ≥ 1,

so (D.1) holds with Ki = 1 and si(p) = p3/2. The regularizer is steep, and on ∆pi the Bregman divergence is 

Di(pi, x i) = 2 X

> αi∈A i

 (√piα − √xiα )2

√xiα 



.

Example D.4 (Tsallis entropy) . Fix λ ∈ (0 , 1) ∪ (1 , 2] and let 

θi(p) = pλ

λ(λ − 1) , p ∈ [0 , 1] .

Then, since λ − 2 ≤ 0 we have 

θ′′  

> i

(p) = pλ−2 ≥ 1 (p ∈ (0 , 1]) ,

so (D.1) holds with Ki = 1 and si(p) = p2−λ. Moreover, if λ ∈ (0 , 1) then θ′

> i

(p) → −∞ as 

p ↓ 0, so it is steep, while if λ ∈ (1 , 2] then θ′

> i

(0+) = 0 , so it is non-steep. On ∆pi ,

Di(pi, x i) = 1

λ(λ − 1) 

X

> αi∈A i



pλiα − λx λ−1 

> iα

piα + ( λ − 1) xλiα 



.24 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

This family contains the Euclidean regularizer as the case λ = 2 and the square-root regularizer as the case λ = 1 /2, while the entropy regularizer is recovered in the limit λ → 1,up to affine terms on the simplex. 

Appendix E. Strategy dynamics 

Consider continuous-time FTRL 

˙y = v(x), x = Q(y).

We start first with well-posedness in score space :

Proposition E.1. v ◦ Q is Lipschitz continuous and the ODE ˙y = v(Q(y)) admits a unique global solution y(·) : R → Y from every initial condition y(0) .Proof. v is multilinear by definition and bounded by finiteness of the game, Q is Lipschitz continuous by Proposition D.1(1), hence their composition is Lipschitz continuous. Well-posedness then follows from standard Cauchy–Lipschitz / Picard–Lindelöf theorem. ■

We would like now to establish the existence of a flow in strategy space . For this purpose, fix Bi ⊆ A i and assume that on some interval I the support of player i is constant: 

xi(t) ∈ ∆( Bi)◦ ∀ t ∈ I. 

Define 

si(p) := 1

θ′′  

> i

(p) , Si(xi) := X

> βi∈B i

si(xiβ ), πiα (xi) := 



si(xiα )

Si(xi) if αi ∈ B i,

0 otherwise. and write πi(xi) = ( πiβ (xi)) βi∈A i .

Proposition E.2. On I, for every αi ∈ B i,

˙xiα = si(xiα )



viα (x) − ⟨ πi(xi), v i(x)⟩



.

Proof. Following [53] and [22], on I, we have xiα (t) > 0 for αi ∈ B i, so θi is C2 along these coordinates. The KKT conditions for the constrained maximization defining xi = Qi(yi) on the face ∆( Bi) yield 

yiα − θ′

> i

(xiα ) = λi, αi ∈ B i,

for some scalar multiplier λi = λi(t) enforcing P 

> αi∈B i

xiα = 1 . Differentiating in time and using ˙yiα = viα (x) gives 

viα (x) − θ′′  

> i

(xiα ) ˙ xiα = ˙λi,

hence 

˙xiα = si(xiα ) viα (x) − ˙λi

.

Summing over αi ∈ B i and using P 

> αi∈B i

˙xiα = 0 yields 

0 = X

> αi∈B i

si(xiα ) viα (x) − ˙λi

 =⇒ ˙λi = X

> αi∈B i

πiα (xi) viα (x) = ⟨πi(xi), v i(x)⟩,

which gives the stated formula. ■

Remark E.1 . In the steep case, the choice map takes values in the relative interior, so the above facewise ODE applies globally along each trajectory (with Bi = Ai). ✦THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 25 

E.1. Construction of the strategy flow. We now encode the induced dynamics directly on X

by a globally defined vector field. This requires a regularity strengthening on si, which is the following Assumption. 

Assumption E.1. For each i, si extends to a globally Lipschitz function on [0 , 1] with si(0) = 0 

Notice that all the steep regularizers in Appendix D.3 verify this assumption. Note also that this assumption implies steepness: 

Proposition E.3. Under Assumption E.1, hi is steep. Proof. Let L > 0 be a Lipschitz constant of si on [0 , 1] . Since si(0) = 0 , we have si(p) = 

|si(p) − si(0) | ≤ Lp for all p ∈ [0 , 1] . Thus, for all p ∈ (0 , 1] ,

θ′′  

> i

(p) = 1

si(p) ≥ 1

Lp .

Fix p0 ∈ (0 , 1] . Since θi ∈ C2((0 , 1]) , θ′ 

> i

is absolutely continuous on [p, p 0] for any p ∈ (0 , p 0),and 

θ′

> i

(p) = θ′

> i

(p0) −

Z p0

> p

θ′′  

> i

(t) dt ≤ θ′

> i

(p0) − 1

L

Z p0

> p

dt t = θ′

> i

(p0) − 1

L log p0

p .

Letting p ↓ 0 yields θ′

> i

(p) → −∞ , i.e. hi is steep. ■

We now state a quick consequence of this, which will be useful for the contruction of the global flow. 

Lemma E.1. Under Assumption E.1, for each i there exists σi > 0 such that Si(xi) ≥ σi for all xi ∈ X i. Consequently πi : Xi → X i is Lipschitz continuous. Proof. Let mi = |A i|. For any xi ∈ X i there exists α with xiα ≥ 1/m i. Since si is continuous on [0 , 1] and strictly positive on (0 , 1] , the minimum 

σi := min  

> p∈[1 /m i,1]

si(p)

exists and satisfies σi > 0. Hence Si(xi) ≥ si(xiα ) ≥ σi. Lipschitz continuity of πi follows because it is a quotient of Lipschitz continuous functions with denominator bounded away from 0. ■

Definition E.1. Define the strategy field F : X → Y by, for each i ∈ N and αi ∈ A i,

Fiα (x) := si(xiα )



viα (x) − ⟨ πi(xi), v i(x)⟩



.

Proposition E.4. Under Assumption E.1 the ODE 

˙x = F (x), x(0) ∈ X ,

admits a unique global solution x(·) : R → X . This yields a continuous flow (Θ t)t∈R on 

X —the strategy flow —which is invariant on each face of X .Proof. Assumption E.1 implies each si is globally Lipschitz on [0 , 1] and, by Lemma E.1, the map xi 7 → πi(xi) is also globally Lipschitz on Xi. Moreover, by multilinearity, v is globally Lipschitz on X . Therefore each component Fiα (x) is a composition of globally Lipschitz maps, hence F is globally Lipschitz on X . Existence and uniqueness of global solutions for all t ∈ R follow from the Cauchy–Lipschitz / Picard–Lindelöf theorem. Moreover, for each i,using si(xiα ) = Si(xi)πiα (xi) we obtain 

X

> αi

˙xiα = X

> αi

Fiα (x) = X

> αi

si(xiα )viα (x) −

 X 

> αi

si(xiα )



⟨πi(xi), v i(x)⟩ = 0 .26 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

This shows P 

> αi

˙xiα = 0 , hence P 

> αi

xiα (t) = 1 for all t. Moreover, if xiα i (t) = 0 , then 

si(0) = 0 implies ˙xiα i (t) = 0 , so zero coordinates remain zero. Consequently, for every initial condition x0 ∈ X and every t ≥ 0,

supp(Θ t(x0)) ⊆ supp( x0),

i.e. each face of X is forward-invariant. To upgrade this to invariance (two-sided), fix a face 

F = Q 

> i∈N

∆( Bi) and note that 

x ∈ F ⇐⇒ xiα = 0 for all i ∈ N , α i ∈ A i \ B i.

By the previous paragraph, if x ∈ F then Θt(x) ∈ F for all t ≥ 0. Consider now the time-reversed ODE 

˙x = −F (x).

Its vector field is again globally Lipschitz. Moreover, the same argument as above applies verbatim: for each i, X

> αi

(−Fiα (x)) = 0 ,

and if xiα = 0 , then si(0) = 0 implies 

−Fiα (x) = 0 .

Hence every face of X is forward-invariant under the time-reversed ODE as well. By uniqueness of solutions and the flow property, the flow of ˙x = −F (x) is (Θ −t)t∈R. Therefore, for every t ≥ 0,

Θ−t(F) ⊆ F .

Applying Θt to both sides and using Θt ◦ Θ−t = Θ 0 = Id yields 

F ⊆ Θt(F).

Since we already have Θt(F) ⊆ F for t ≥ 0, it follows that 

Θt(F) = F

for all t ≥ 0. Replacing t by −t gives Θt(F) = F for all t ∈ R. ■

Remark E.2 . Since F is globally Lipschitz, the time-reversed flow is obtained by solving 

˙x = −F (x), i.e. Θ−t is the flow map of −F . Moreover, if one considers the negated game with payoffs −ui (so the payoff field becomes −v), then the induced strategy field is exactly 

−F (replace v by −v in Definition E.1). Hence (Θ −t)t∈R coincides with the strategy flow of the negated game. ✦

Naturally, when h is steep, we shall always work under Assumption E.1 whenever we mention the strategy flow induced by (SD). 

Remark E.3 . Consider a subgame B = Q 

> i∈N

Bi and its face F = span( B), let QB : Y → F ◦

be the face-restricted choice map QB(y) := arg max w∈F {⟨ y, w ⟩ − h(w)}, and consider the facewise FTRL dynamics 

˙y = v(x), x = QB(y). (FTRL-B)Now, given x0 ∈ F , the strategy flow trajectory (Θ t) induced by (SD) with Θ0 = x0 coincides, by construction, with the (FTRL-B) orbit x(·) with QB(y(0)) = x0 (which indeed exists, by Lemma D.1, and is unique by Proposition D.2). Hence the strategy flow can be seen as a globally Lipschitz continuous patchwork of these facewise FTRL dynamics. ✦THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 27 

Appendix F. Omitted proofs from Section 4 

We start by stating two properties of FTRL which will be useful for this section. We start with a powerful rationality property, proved in [53]: 

Theorem F.1. Under (FTRL) , any dominated mixed strategy becomes extinct along every orbit x(t) = Q(y(t)) .

Where we say that xi ∈ X i is dominated by x′ 

> i

∈ X i if x′ 

> i

yields a strictly higher payoff against every opponents’ profile: ui(x′

> i

, w −i) > u i(xi, w −i) for all w−i ∈ X −i.We will also use the following fact, proved by Flokas et al. [22]. 

Theorem F.2. Let A ⊆ X ◦. Then A is not asymptotically stable under (FTRL) . Consequently, if h is steep, no subset of the relative interior of any face is asymptotically stable under the strategy flow induced by (SD) . In particular, every asymptotically stable set intersects the vertex set A.

F.1. Stability and attraction. Recall first that we identify each pure action αi ∈ A i with the corresponding vertex of the simplex Xi (and likewise each pure profile α ∈ A with the corresponding vertex of X ). The next argument hinges on two structural properties of the strategy flow (Θ t): face-invariance and elimination of dominated strategies . In fact, the same reasoning applies verbatim to any flow on X that satisfies these two properties. Indeed, they imply together that, on each one-dimensional face (edge) of the strategy space, the induced motion is aligned with player deviations. More precisely, trajectories are confined to the edge by face-invariance while elimination of dominated strategies forces them to drift toward the endpoint corresponding to the profitable unilateral deviation. In this sense, the flow on edges follows the orientation prescribed by the preference graph. 

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose, toward a contradiction, that α ∈ S and α → α′ in the preference graph, but α′ /∈ S. There exists then a unique player i such that α and α′ are 

i–comparable and ui(α′) ≥ ui(α). Let U be an attracting neighborhood of S. Because 

α ∈ S ⊂ U and α′ /∈ S, shrinking U if necessary we may assume α′ /∈ U . By connectedness of the segment [α, α ′], there exists β ∈ (α, α ′) ∩ U . By face invariance under steep regularizers (Proposition E.4), Θt(β) ∈ [α, α ′] for all t ≥ 0.If ui(α′) > u i(α), on the segment [α, α ′], player i’s action α′ 

> i

strictly dominates αi, so by elimination of dominated strategies applied to this one–player game (see Theorem F.1) we have Θt(β) −→ α′ as t → ∞ . Since β ∈ U and U is an attracting neighborhood of S, every limit point of (Θ t) starting from β lies in S, hence α′ ∈ S, a contradiction. If ui(α′) = ui(α), then every point of [α, α ′] is stationary by face-invariance and the fact that a game with constant payoffs admits constant dynamics under (FTRL). Define now 

α(λ) := (1 − λ)α + λα ′, λ ∈ [0 , 1] , and set 

Λ := {λ ∈ [0 , 1] : α(λ) ∈ S}.

Then 0 ∈ Λ and Λ is closed (since S is closed). Let λ∗ = sup Λ . If λ∗ < 1, choose λ ∈ (λ∗, 1) 

sufficiently close to λ∗ so that α(λ) ∈ U . But α(λ) is stationary, and by attraction, this forces α(λ) ∈ S, contradicting the choice of λ∗. Hence λ∗ = 1 and α′ = α(1) ∈ S, again a contradiction. ■

With this, we obtain the following useful corollary: 

Corollary F.1. Every asymptotically stable set for the strategy flow induced by (SD) contains a set of pure profiles which is closed under better replies. 28 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Proof. By Theorem F.2, every asymptotically stable set S must intersect A. Proposition 1 then forces S ∩ A to be closed under better replies. ■

To prove the next results, we will need the following lemma: 

Lemma F.1. Let i ∈ N and αi ∈ A i. For G ≥ 0 define the gap region 

Γi(αi, G ) := {yi ∈ Y i : yiα ≥ yiβ + G ∀β̸ = α},

then, for every r > 0 ,there exists a threshold Gi(αi, r ) > 0 such that for every yi ∈

Γi(αi, G i(αi, r )) one has ∥Qi(yi) − αi∥1 ≤ r.Proof. Fix r > 0 and assume, toward a contradiction, that no such Gi(αi, r ) exists. Then for each integer m ≥ 1 we can find ymi ∈ Γi(αi, m ) such that ∥Qi(ymi ) − αi∥1 > r . By Proposition D.1(3), replacing ymi by zmi := ymi − ymiα 1 does not change Qi and yields 

zmiα = 0 and zmiβ ≤ − m for all βi̸ = αi. Hence zmiβ − zmiα → −∞ for every βi̸ = αi. By Proposition D.1(4), this implies Qiβ (zmi ) → 0 for every βi̸ = αi, and therefore Qi(zmi ) → αi

in ∥ · ∥ 1, contradicting ∥Qi(ymi ) − αi∥1 > r . ■

In the next proof, due to the lack of face-invariance, we instead initialize the score dynamics so that not only play starts arbitrarily close to α, but also all opponents are forced to remain close to α−i over a prescribed time window by imposing large initial score gaps. During that window, the deviator’s score difference between αi and the strict better reply α′ 

> i

drifts at a uniform negative rate, and we pick the window length so that the choice map flips (up to a prescribed tolerance) toward α′

> i

, forcing the orbit to exit a stable neighborhood. 

Proof of Theorem 1. Let S ⊆ X be nonempty, closed, and stable under (FTRL), i.e. 

x(0) ∈ V ∩ Im Q =⇒ x(t) ∈ U ∀t ≥ 0

for every neighborhood U of S and some neighborhood V of S. Assume toward a contradiction that α ∈ S ∩ A and α → α′ is a strict better reply but α′ /∈ S. Let i be the deviating player, so α′ = ( α′

> i

, α −i), and set 

δ := ui(α′

> i

, α −i) − ui(αi, α −i) > 0.

Since S is closed and α′ /∈ S, let r := dist( α′, S ) > 0 and define the open neighborhood 

U := {x ∈ X : dist( x, S ) < r/ 2},

so α′ /∈ U . By stability, there exists an open neighborhood V ⊇ S such that every solution orbit x = Q(y) with x(0) ∈ V ∩ Im Q satisfies x(t) ∈ U for all t ≥ 0. Because α ∈ S ⊆ V

and V is open, pick r0 ∈ (0 , r/ 8) such that B1(α, r 0) ⊆ V . Define the continuous function 

g(x−i) := ui(α′

> i

, x −i) − ui(αi, x −i), x−i ∈ X −i.

Since g(α−i) = δ, there exists κ0 > 0 such that 

∥x−i − α−i∥1 ≤ κ0 =⇒ g(x−i) ≥ δ/ 2. (F.1) Set κ := min {κ0, r/ 8, r 0/4}. If |N | ≥ 2, choose ρ := min {κ/ 2, r 0/2} and numbers (ρj )j̸ =i

with ρj > 0 and P  

> j̸=i

ρj = ρ. If |N | = 1 set ρ := 0 and ignore all j̸ = i below. Next, we invoke Lemma F.1: for each j̸ = i choose Gj > 0 such that 

yj ∈ Γj (αj , G j ) =⇒ ∥Qj (yj ) − αj ∥1 ≤ ρj . (F.2) Likewise, apply the same property twice for player i to obtain B > 0 and G′ 

> i

> 0 such that 

yi ∈ Γi(αi, B ) =⇒ ∥Qi(yi) − αi∥1 ≤ r0/2, (F.3) 

yi ∈ Γi(α′

> i

, G ′

> i

) =⇒ ∥Qi(yi) − α′

> i

∥1 ≤ r/ 8. (F.4) THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 29 

Fix now the horizon 

T∗ := 2( B + G′

> i

)

δ , and set T := T∗.

For each player j̸ = i define the payoff spread 

Mj := max  

> x∈X

max   

> βj,γ j∈A j

|vjβ (x) − vjγ (x)| < ∞.

Initialize the opponents’ scores by 

yjα (0) = Gj + Mj T, yjβ (0) = 0 , βj̸ = αj .

For each βj̸ = αj consider the gap zjβ (t) := yjα (t) − yjβ (t). Then 

˙zjβ (t) = vjα (x(t)) − vjβ (x(t)) ≥ − Mj ,

so for t ∈ [0 , T ],

zjβ (t) ≥ zjβ (0) − Mj t ≥ (Gj + Mj T ) − Mj T = Gj .

Thus yj (t) ∈ Γj (αj , G j ) for all t ∈ [0 , T ], and (F.2) yields 

∥xj (t) − αj ∥1 = ∥Qj (yj (t)) − αj ∥1 ≤ ρj , ∀t ∈ [0 , T ], ∀j̸ = i. (F.5) In particular, 

∥x−i(t) − α−i∥1 ≤ X 

> j̸=i

ρj = ρ ≤ κ ≤ κ0, ∀t ∈ [0 , T ]. (F.6) By (F.1) and (F.6), for t ∈ [0 , T ] we have 

ui(α′

> i

, x −i(t)) − ui(αi, x −i(t)) = g(x−i(t)) ≥ δ/ 2.

Now initialize player i’s scores by 

yiα (0) = B, yiα ′ (0) = 0 , yiγ (0) = −R (γi /∈ { αi, α ′

> i

}),

where R will be chosen momentarily. Then yi(0) ∈ Γi(αi, B ), so by (F.3) we have ∥xi(0) −

αi∥1 ≤ r0/2. Combining with (F.5) at t = 0 gives 

∥x(0) − α∥1 ≤ ∥ xi(0) − αi∥1 + X 

> j̸=i

∥xj (0) − αj ∥1 ≤ r0/2 + ρ ≤ r0,

hence x(0) ∈ B1(α, r 0) ⊆ V . Since also x(0) = Q(y(0)) ∈ Im Q, stability implies x(t) ∈ U

for all t ≥ 0.Define the deviator’s score difference z(t) := yiα (t) − yiα ′ (t). For t ∈ [0 , T ],

˙z(t) = viα (x(t)) − viα ′ (x(t)) = ui(αi, x −i(t)) − ui(α′

> i

, x −i(t)) ≤ − δ/ 2,

so 

z(T ) ≤ z(0) − (δ/ 2) T = B − (δ/ 2) · 2( B + G′

> i

)

δ = −G′

> i

,

i.e. yiα ′ (T ) ≥ yiα (T ) + G′

> i

.It remains to ensure that α′ 

> i

dominates every other action at time T by margin G′

> i

. Let 

Mi := max  

> x∈X

max 

> βi,γ i∈A i

|viβ (x) − viγ (x)|,

and for each γi /∈ { αi, α ′

> i

} define wγ (t) := yiα ′ (t) − yiγ (t). Then ˙wγ (t) = viα ′ (x(t)) −

viγ (x(t)) ≥ − Mi, so for t ∈ [0 , T ],

wγ (t) ≥ wγ (0) − Mit = R − Mit. 

Choose R ≥ G′ 

> i

+ MiT . Then wγ (T ) ≥ G′ 

> i

for all γi /∈ { αi, α ′

> i

}, and we already have 

yiα ′ (T ) ≥ yiα (T ) + G′

> i

. Hence yi(T ) ∈ Γi(α′

> i

, G ′

> i

), and (F.4) yields 

∥xi(T ) − α′

> i

∥1 ≤ r/ 8. (F.7) 30 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Also, by (F.5) at t = T ,

∥x−i(T ) − α−i∥1 ≤ X 

> j̸=i

ρj = ρ ≤ r/ 8.

Therefore, 

∥x(T ) − α′∥1 ≤ ∥ xi(T ) − α′

> i

∥1 + ∥x−i(T ) − α−i∥1 ≤ r/ 8 + r/ 8 = r/ 4.

Since x 7 → dist( x, S ) is 1-Lipschitz in ∥ · ∥ 1, we have 

dist( x(T ), S ) ≥ dist( α′, S ) − ∥ x(T ) − α′∥1 ≥ r − r/ 4 = 3r/ 4 > r/ 2,

so x(T ) /∈ U . This contradicts stability. ■

F.2. Connectedness. The next lemma works by showing that the span of a strongly connected set cannot contain a proper attractor. Indeed, we proceed by contradiction, showing first that such an attractor would have to contain all vertices of the set, and then, by induction, show how that would force the existence of a fully interior repellor, which is impossible. The next theorem shows that strong connectivity of pure profiles propagates to dynamical connectedness of their mixed span. 

Lemma F.2. If H ⊆ A is strongly connected, then span( H) is internally chain transitive for the strategy flow induced by (SD) .Proof. Let H ⊆ A be strongly connected. By Proposition C.1, it suffices to show that 

span( H) is invariant and that the flow restricted to span( H) admits no proper attractor. By Proposition E.4, every face of X is invariant under the strategy flow. Since span( H)

is the union of all faces whose vertices lie in H, it follows that span( H) is invariant. Let 

A ⊆ span( H) be an attractor for the restricted flow on span( H). We show that A = span( H).Pick a face F ⊆ span( H) with A ∩ F̸ = ∅. Because F is invariant, Lemma C.1 implies that A ∩ F is an attractor for the flow restricted to F. Hence A ∩ F is asymptotically stable for the dynamics on F, so by Theorem F.2 it intersects the vertex set of F. Choose 

α ∈ (A ∩ F ) ∩ A . Since α ∈ span( H) and α is a vertex, we have α ∈ H .We claim that H ⊆ A. If not, pick α′ ∈ H \ A. By strong connectivity of H, there exists a directed path 

α = α0 → α1 → · · · → αk = α′ with all αj ∈ H .

Let j be the smallest index such that αj ∈ A and αj+1 /∈ A, and set E := [ αj , α j+1 ]. By Proposition E.4, E is invariant, and since αj ∈ A ∩ E, Lemma C.1 shows that A ∩ E is an attractor for the restricted flow on E. Applying Proposition 1 to this (one-dimensional) restricted flow yields that (A∩E)∩A is closed under better replies on E and since αj → αj+1 ,we get αj+1 ∈ A ∩ E, a contradiction. Thus H ⊆ A.Next, we prove that every face F ⊆ span( H) satisfies F ⊆ A, by induction on d := dim F.For d = 0 , F is a vertex in A, hence lies in H ⊆ A. Assume d ≥ 1 and the claim holds for all proper subfaces F′ ⊊ F. Note first that the boundary of F verifies ∂F = S 

> F′⊊F

F′ ⊆ A.Let AF := A ∩ F , by Lemma C.1, AF is an attractor for the restricted flow on F. If AF̸ = F,consider the corresponding dual repellor RF which is nonempty, compact, invariant in F,and disjoint from AF . Since ∂F ⊆ AF , we have RF ∩ ∂F = ∅, hence RF ⊆ F ◦. For the time-reversed flow on F, the set RF is an attractor, and by Remark E.2, this time-reversed flow is itself a strategy flow (of the negated game) on F. This contradicts Theorem F.2, therefore AF = F, i.e. F ⊆ A.By induction, every face F ⊆ span( H) is contained in A, so span( H) ⊆ A, since always 

A ⊆ span( H), we conclude A = span( H). Thus the restricted flow on span( H) admits no proper attractor, and Proposition C.1 yields that span( H) is internally chain transitive. ■THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 31 

Proof of Theorem 2 . Let H ⊆ A be again strongly connected. Since span( H) is invariant, Lemma C.1 applied to the attractor A and span( H) shows that A ∩ span( H) is an attractor for the flow restricted to span( H) (nonempty because H ⊆ A ∩ span( H)). By Lemma F.2, 

span( H) is internally chain transitive, hence the restricted flow on span( H) admits no proper attractor. Therefore A ∩ span( H) = span( H), i.e. span( H) ⊆ A.In the case the whole preference graph is strongly connected, applying this to H = A

yields that span( H) = X admits no proper attractor. ■

Appendix G. Omitted proofs from Section 5 

G.1. Energy functions and asymptotic stability. Before we start, we shall first define the notion of energy functions , introduced in [37, 55, 57], which allow us to convert local dissipation in score space into asymptotic stability in strategy space . They are defined as follows: 

Definition G.1. Let S ⊆ X be a nonempty closed set. Under (FTRL), a map E : Y → [0 , ∞)

is a local energy function for S if: (1) E is Lipschitz and C1 on Y.(2) For every sequence (yk)k∈N ⊆ Y ,

Q(yk) → S ⇐⇒ E(yk) → 0.

(3) There exists ¯E > 0 such that for all 0 < E − < E + ≤ ¯E,

sup  ˙E(y) : E− < E (y) < E + < 0,

where ˙E(y) := ⟨∇ E(y), v (Q(y)) ⟩ is the derivative of E along (FTRL). The link with the long-run behavior of the continuous-time dynamics, which we prove, is as follows: 

Theorem G.1. Let S ⊆ X be nonempty and closed, if S admits a local energy function, then 

S is asymptotically stable under (FTRL) .Proof. Let y(·) be a solution of ˙y = v(Q(y)) and set x(t) = Q(y(t)) and E(t) := E(y(t)) . By Definition G.1(1) and the chain rule, E is C1 and ˙E(t) = ˙E(y(t)) .First, for every neighborhood U of S in X there exists δU > 0 such that 

E(y) < δ U =⇒ Q(y) ∈ U. (G.1) Otherwise, there exist U and yk with E(yk) → 0 but Q(yk) /∈ U , contradicting Q(yk) → S

from Definition G.1(2). Second, for every δ > 0 there exists a neighborhood Vδ of S such that 

Q(y) ∈ Vδ =⇒ E(y) < δ. (G.2) Otherwise, there exist δ > 0 and ym with dist( Q(ym), S ) < 1/m but E(ym) ≥ δ, contradicting Definition G.1(2). By Definition G.1(3), fix ¯E > 0 such that for every 0 < E − < E + ≤ ¯E,

κ(E−, E +) := − sup { ˙E(y) : E− < E (y) < E +} > 0. (∗)Hence, whenever E(t) ∈ (E−, E +), we have ˙E(t) ≤ − κ(E−, E +). In particular, if 0 < a < b ≤

¯E and E(t0) ≤ a, then E(t) ≤ a for all t ≥ t0: otherwise, letting τ = inf {t ≥ t0 : E(t) > a }

gives E(τ ) = a by continuity, and then continuity yields ε > 0 with E(t) ∈ (a, b ) for 

t ∈ (τ, τ + ε), so ˙E(t) ≤ − κ(a, b ) < 0 on (τ, τ + ε) by ( ∗), contradicting E(t) > a for t > τ 

close enough. For stability, let U be any neighborhood of S. Choose δU ∈ (0 , ¯E] so that (G.1) holds, pick a ∈ (0 , δ U ), and apply (G.2) with δ = a to obtain a neighborhood V of S such that 32 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

x(0) = Q(y(0)) ∈ V implies E(0) < a . The previous paragraph (with (a, b ) = ( a, δ U )) yields 

E(t) ≤ a < δ U for all t ≥ 0, hence x(t) ∈ U for all t ≥ 0 by (G.1), hence S is Lyapunov stable. For attraction, fix b ∈ (0 , ¯E] and assume E(0) < b . Let a ∈ (0 , b ) be arbitrary. If E(0) ≤ a,set Ta = 0 . Otherwise, if E(0) > a and E(t) > a for all t ≥ 0, then E(t) ∈ (a, b ) for all t ≥ 0,so ˙E(t) ≤ − κ(a, b ) for all t ≥ 0 and thus 

E(t) ≤ E (0) − κ(a, b ) t, 

which is impossible for t > E(0) /κ (a, b ) because E(t) ≥ 0. Hence there exists Ta with 

E(Ta) ≤ a, and the previous paragraph implies E(t) ≤ a for all t ≥ Ta. Since this holds for every a ∈ (0 , b ), we obtain E(t) → 0 as t → ∞ . If dist( x(t), S )̸ → 0, there exist ε > 0 and 

tk → ∞ with dist( x(tk), S ) ≥ ε for all k. But E(tk) = E(y(tk)) → 0, so Definition G.1(2) implies x(tk) = Q(y(tk)) → S, a contradiction, therefore dist( x(t), S ) → 0. Finally, applying (G.2) with δ = b yields a neighborhood U0 of S such that x(0) ∈ U0 ∩ Im Q implies E(0) < b ,the above then shows dist( x(t), S ) → 0 for all such initial conditions, so S is attracting. ■

G.2. When preferences are enough. We start by constructing an energy function for spans of club subgames. 

Lemma G.1. Let B ⊆ A be a subgame. If B is closed under better replies, then the Fenchel gap 

FB(y) := h∗(y) − h∗B(y), h∗B(y) := max 

> w∈span( B)

{⟨ y, w ⟩ − h(w)},

is a local energy function for span( B).Proof. Write ¯Bi := Ai \ B i and F := span( B) = Q 

> i∈N

∆( Bi). For each i ∈ N , define the restricted choice map 7

QBi (yi) := arg max 

> xi∈∆( Bi)

{⟨ yi, x i⟩ − hi(xi)}, QB(y) := ( QBi (yi)) i∈N ∈ F ,

and set, throughout the proof, 

x := Q(y), xB := QB(y), ∆i := xi − xB 

> i

, mi := X 

> α∈¯Bi

xiα .

We divide the proof into 6 steps. 

Step 1: By Proposition D.1(1), h∗ is C1 and ∇h∗(y) = Q(y). Applying the same result playerwise to the reduced simplex ∆( Bi) shows that the restricted conjugate 

h∗Bi (yi) := max 

> wi∈∆( Bi)

{⟨ yi, w i⟩ − hi(wi)}

is C1 with ∇h∗Bi (yi) = QBi (yi). Since h = P 

> i

hi and F is a product face, we have 

h∗B(y) = P 

> i

h∗Bi (yi) and thus 

∇h∗B(y) = QB(y).

Consequently, 

∇FB(y) = ∇h∗(y) − ∇ h∗B(y) = Q(y) − QB(y) = x − xB. (G.3) Because x, x B ∈ X for all y, the gradient (G.3) is bounded on Y, hence FB is globally Lipschitz and C1, verifying Definition G.1(1). 

Step 2: By definition, 

h∗(y) = max  

> x∈X

{⟨ y, x ⟩ − h(x)}, h∗B(y) = max  

> w∈F

{⟨ y, w ⟩ − h(w)},        

> 7By abuse, we denote here ∆( Bi)as the subset of mixed strategies of wi∈ X iwith supp( wi)⊆ B i.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 33

so 

FB(y) = h∗(y) − h∗B(y) = min 

> w∈F

 h(w) + h∗(y) − ⟨ y, w ⟩ = min  

> w∈F

Fh(w, y ), (G.4) where Fh(w, y ) = P 

> i∈N

Fi(wi, y i) is the (playerwise) Fenchel coupling already defined in Appendix D. By Fenchel–Young, Fi(·, y i) ≥ 0 for each i, hence FB(y) ≥ 0 for all y. Moreover, 

FB(y) = 0 if and only if there exists w ∈ F with Fh(w, y ) = 0 , then each Fi(wi, y i) = 0 , so 

wi = Qi(yi) for all i by Proposition D.3(2), i.e. Q(y) = w ∈ F . Conversely, if Q(y) ∈ F ,choosing w = Q(y) in (G.4) gives FB(y) ≤ Fh(Q(y), y ) = 0 , hence FB(y) = 0 . Thus, 

FB(y) = 0 ⇐⇒ Q(y) ∈ F . (G.5) 

Step 3: Let Kmin := min i∈N Ki. Fix y ∈ Y and x = Q(y). Using (G.4) and the quadratic lower bound of the Fenchel coupling from Proposition D.3(1), 

FB(y) = min 

> w∈F

X

> i∈N

Fi(wi, y i) ≥ min 

> w∈F

X

> i∈N

Ki

2 ∥xi − wi∥22 ≥ Kmin 

2 dist( x, F)2.

Therefore, if FB(yk) → 0 along some sequence (yk), then dist( Q(yk), F) → 0, i.e. Q(yk) → F 

because F is closed. Conversely, assume dist( Q(yk), F) → 0 and set xk := Q(yk). Choose 

wk ∈ F such that ∥xk − wk∥2 ≤ dist( xk, F) + 1 /k , hence ∥xk − wk∥2 → 0. By compactness of F, pass to a subsequence (not relabeled) with wk → w ∈ F , then also xk → w. For each 

i, Qi(yki ) = xki → wi, so Proposition D.3(2) yields Fi(wi, y ki ) → 0. Summing over i, we get 

Fh(w, y k) → 0 and then, by (G.4), 

0 ≤ FB(yk) = min  

> u∈F

Fh(u, y k) ≤ Fh(w, y k) → 0.

Hence FB(yk) → 0. This proves Definition G.1(2). 

Step 4: Fix i ∈ N , βi ∈ B i and αi ∈ ¯Bi. For every pure opponents’ profile γ−i ∈ Q  

> j̸=i

Bj ,closure of B under better replies means that (αi, γ −i) cannot be a weakly improving deviation from (βi, γ −i), hence 

ui(βi, γ −i) > u i(αi, γ −i) ∀ γ−i ∈ Y 

> j̸=i

Bj .

By multilinearity, the same strict inequality holds for all mixed opponents’ profiles w−i ∈Q  

> j̸=i

∆( Bj ), i.e., for all w ∈ F :

viβ (w) > v iα (w).

Consider now the gap viβ (w) − viα (w), this is continuous on the compact set F and strictly positive everywhere, so 8

δ′ 

> i

:= min  

> βi∈B i, α i∈¯Bi

min  

> w∈F

viβ (w) − viα (w) > 0

Set δi := δ′

> i

/2 for those i with ¯Bi̸ = ∅. By uniform continuity of v on compact X , there exists ε > 0 such that whenever dist( x, F) < ε , we have, for all i ∈ N with ¯Bi̸ = ∅, βi ∈ B i,

αi ∈ ¯Bi,

viβ (x) − viα (x) ≥ δi. (G.6) 

Step 5: By Proposition D.1(5), there exist λi ∈ R and multipliers νi ∈ RAi 

> +

such that for all γi ∈ A i,

yiγ = θ′

> i

(xiγ ) + λi − νiγ , xiγ > 0 ⇒ νiγ = 0 .

Likewise, applying the same KKT statement to the restricted maximization over ∆( Bi),there exist λB 

> i

∈ R and νB 

> i

∈ RBi 

> +

such that for all βi ∈ B i,

yiβ = θ′

> i

(xB 

> iβ

) + λB 

> i

− νB 

> iβ

, xB 

> iβ

> 0 ⇒ νB 

> iβ

= 0 , xB 

> iα

= 0 (αi ∈ A i \ B i).  

> 8With the convention that the minimum over an empty index set is +∞.34 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS

Define θ′

> i

(0+) := lim p↓0 θ′

> i

(p) ∈ [−∞ , ∞) and the truncated inverse 

φi(z) := 

(

0, z ≤ θ′

> i

(0+) ,

(θ′

> i

)−1(z), z > θ ′

> i

(0+) ,

which is nondecreasing. We claim that 

xiγ = φi(yiγ − λi) (γi ∈ A i), xB 

> iβ

= φi(yiβ − λB 

> i

) (βi ∈ B i). (G.7) Indeed, if xiγ > 0, then νiγ = 0 and yiγ −λi = θ′

> i

(xiγ ), so xiγ = ( θ′

> i

)−1(yiγ −λi) = φi(yiγ −λi).If xiγ = 0 , then yiγ − λi = θ′

> i

(0+) − νiγ ≤ θ′

> i

(0+) (interpreting θ′

> i

(xiγ ) as θ′

> i

(0+) at xiγ =0 ), hence φi(yiγ − λi) = 0 = xiγ . The same reasoning applies to xB on Bi. Summing (G.7) over 

Ai and Bi respectively gives 

X

> γ∈A i

φi(yiγ − λi) = 1 , X

> β∈B i

φi(yiβ − λB 

> i

) = 1 .

Since φi ≥ 0, X

> β∈B i

φi(yiβ − λi) ≤ X

> γ∈A i

φi(yiγ − λi) = 1 .

Because φi is nondecreasing, the function τ 7 → P 

> β∈B i

φi(yiβ − τ ) is nonincreasing, thus the equality P 

> β∈B i

φi(yiβ − λB 

> i

) = 1 and the inequality at τ = λi imply λB 

> i

≤ λi.9 Therefore, for every β ∈ B,

yiβ − λi ≤ yiβ − λB 

> i

⇒ xiβ = φi(yiβ − λi) ≤ φi(yiβ − λB 

> i

) = xB 

> iβ

.

In summary, 

xiβ ≤ xB 

> iβ

(β ∈ B i), xB 

> iα

= 0 (α ∈ ¯Bi). (G.8) Consequently, we have the sign and mass identities 

∆iα ≥ 0 ( α ∈ ¯Bi), ∆iβ ≤ 0 ( β ∈ B i), mi = X 

> α∈¯Bi

∆iα = − X

> βi∈B i

∆iβ . (G.9) 

Step 6: Along continuous-time FTRL, ˙y = v(Q(y)) = v(x), so by (G.3), 

˙FB(y) = ⟨∇ FB(y), ˙y⟩ = ⟨x − xB, v (x)⟩ = X

> i∈N

⟨∆i, v i(x)⟩. (G.10) Assume now that dist( x, F) < ε , with ε from (G.6). Fix i with ¯Bi̸ = ∅, then (G.6) yields 

viα (x) ≤ min βi∈B i viβ (x) − δi for all αi ∈ ¯Bi and viβ (x) ≥ min βi∈B i viβ (x) for all βi ∈ B i.Using (G.9), 

⟨∆i, v i(x)⟩ = X 

> αi∈¯Bi

viα (x)∆ iα + X

> βi∈B i

viβ (x)∆ iβ 

≤ ( min 

> βi∈B i

viβ (x) − δi) X 

> αi∈¯Bi

∆iα + min 

> βi∈B i

viβ (x) X

> βi∈B i

∆iβ 

= ( min 

> βi∈B i

viβ (x) − δi)mi − min 

> βi∈B i

viβ (x) mi = −δimi = −δi

X 

> αi∈¯Bi

xiα . (G.11) Summing over i in (G.10) gives, whenever dist( x, F) < ε ,

˙FB(y) ≤ − X  

> i∈N : ¯ Bi̸=∅

δi

X 

> α∈¯Bi

xiα . (G.12) 

> 9

Unless both sums happen to equal 1 at τ = λi, in which case the maximizer of the unrestricted problem is in F anyway and one might take λi = λB 

> i

.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 35 

Now set Kmin := min i Ki and define 

¯E := Kmin 

2 ε2.

By Step 3, FB(y) ≤ ¯E implies dist( Q(y), F) ≤ ε, so the drift bound (G.12) holds on the entire sublevel set {FB ≤ ¯E}. Fix 0 < E − < E + ≤ ¯E and consider the domain 

D := {y ∈ Y : E− < F B(y) < E +}. Define the continuous outside-mass functional 

M (y) := X

> i∈N

X 

> αi∈¯Bi

Qiα (yi) = X

> i∈N

mi.

Let δmin := min i: ¯ Bi̸ =∅ δi > 0 (if ¯Bi = ∅ for all i, then F = X and FB = 0 everywhere, so the dissipation requirement is vacuous). Then (G.12) gives, for all y ∈ D ,

˙FB(y) ≤ − δmin M (y).

It remains to show that M is bounded away from 0 on D. Suppose not, then there exists a sequence yk ∈ D with M (yk) → 0. Let xk := Q(yk) and define wk ∈ F by renormalizing xki

on Bi: if mki := P  

> αi∈¯Bi

xkiα and 1 − mki > 0, set 

wkiβ := xkiβ 

1 − mki

(βi ∈ B i), wkiα := 0 (αi ∈ ¯Bi).

Then wk ∈ F and, for each i,

∥xki −wki ∥22 = X

> βi∈B i

xkiβ − xkiβ 

1 − mki

!2

+ X 

> αi∈¯Bi

(xkiα )2 =

 mki

1 − mki

2 X

> βi∈B i

(xkiβ )2 + X 

> αi∈¯Bi

(xkiα )2.

Using P 

> βi∈B i

(xkiβ )2 ≤ (P 

> βi∈B i

xkiβ )2 = (1 − mki )2 and P  

> αi∈¯Bi

(xkiα )2 ≤ (P  

> αi∈¯Bi

xkiα )2 =(mki )2, we obtain 

∥xki − wki ∥22 ≤ (mki )2 + ( mki )2 = 2( mki )2, so ∥xki − wki ∥2 ≤ √2 mki .

Therefore, 

dist( xk, F) ≤ ∥ xk − wk∥2 ≤

sX

> i∈N

∥xki − wki ∥22 ≤ √2 X

> i∈N

mki = √2 M (yk) → 0.

By Step 3, this implies FB(yk) → 0, contradicting FB(yk) > E− for all k. Hence 

inf y∈D M (y) =: κ(E−, E +) > 0, and thus 

sup 

> y∈D

˙FB(y) ≤ − δmin κ(E−, E +) < 0,

which is exactly Definition G.1(3). All three items of Definition G.1 are verified, so FB is a local energy function for F =span( B). ■

We may now harvest what we sowed: 

Proof of Theorem 3 . Combine Theorem G.1 with Lemma G.1. ■

Proof of Corollary 1 . Combine Theorem 1 with Theorem 3. ■

Proof of Corollary 2 . We shall construct a basin of attraction on all of X by gluing together all the facewise basins of (FTRL) restricted to each face. Let F = span( B) = Q 

> i∈N

∆( Bi). First, assume that B is closed under better replies. We show that F is an attractor for the strategy flow induced by (SD), i.e., F is invariant 36 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

and asymptotically stable. Let F′ = span( B′) = Q 

> i∈N

∆( B′

> i

) be any face of X such that 

F ∩ F ′̸ = ∅. Then Bi ∩ B ′

> i

̸ = ∅ for all i, and 

F ∩ F ′ = Y

> i∈N

∆( Bi ∩ B ′

> i

) = span( B| B′ ), B| B′ := Y

> i∈N

(Bi ∩ B ′

> i

). (G.13) Indeed, x ∈ F ∩ F ′ if and only if for every i, xi ∈ ∆( Bi) ∩ ∆( B′

> i

) = ∆( Bi ∩ B ′

> i

). Moreover, 

B| B′ is closed under better replies in the preference graph restricted to the vertex set B′: if 

α ∈ B| B′ and α → β with β ∈ B ′, then α ∈ B and the arc α → β is also an arc of the full preference graph, hence β ∈ B by closure of B, so β ∈ B ∩ B ′ = B| B′ .Fix such a face F′ = span( B′) and consider the facewise FTRL dynamics (FTRL-B′) on 

F′. Applying Theorem 3 to the restricted game on action sets B′ yields that 

F ∩ F ′ = span( B| B′ )

is asymptotically stable under (FTRL-B′). Under Assumption E.1, Lemma D.1 gives 

Im QB′ = F′◦ , and by Remark E.3 the restriction of the strategy flow to F′ coincides with the induced strategy orbit of (FTRL-B′) for initial conditions in F′◦ . Hence, for every ε > 0

and every such F′, there exists a neighborhood U ε 

> F′

⊆ F ′ of F ∩ F ′ in the relative topology of F′ such that every strategy flow trajectory with initial condition x0 ∈ U ε 

> F′

∩ F ′◦ satisfies 

dist(Θ t(x0), F ∩ F ′) < ε ∀t ≥ 0, lim  

> t→+∞

dist(Θ t(x0), F ∩ F ′) = 0 . (G.14) Let now F be the (finite) set of faces F′ of X such that F ∩ F ′̸ = ∅. Fix ε > 0. For each 

F′ ∈ F, let U ε 

> F′

be as in (G.14). Fix x ∈ F and define F(x) := {F ′ ∈ F : x ∈ F ′}. Since X

has finitely many faces, set 

rx := 12 min {dist( x, F′′ ) : F′′ a face of X , x / ∈ F ′′ } > 0,

so that Brx (x) ∩ X meets only faces F′ with x ∈ F ′ (equivalently, only faces in F(x)). Next, for each F′ ∈ F(x), since U ε 

> F′

is a neighborhood of F ∩ F ′ in F′ and x ∈ F ∩ F ′, there exists 

ρx 

> F′

> 0 such that 

Bρx 

> F ′

(x) ∩ F ′ ⊆ U ε 

> F′

.

Define 

ρx := min 



rx, min  

> F′∈F(x)

ρx

> F′



> 0, Wx := Bρx (x) ∩ X ,

so Wx is open in X . Let z ∈ Wx and let Fz denote the (unique) minimal face of X containing 

z. By construction of rx, every face of X intersecting Wx contains x, so in particular x ∈ F z ,hence Fz ∈ F(x) ⊆ F. Moreover, 

z ∈ Bρx (x) ∩ F z ⊆ U ε

> Fz

by construction of ρx. By definition of minimal face, z ∈ F ◦ 

> z

and by Proposition E.4, faces are invariant for the strategy flow, so Θt(z) ∈ F z for all t ≥ 0. Applying (G.14) with F′ = Fz

yields 

dist(Θ t(z), F ∩ F z ) < ε ∀t ≥ 0, dist(Θ t(z), F ∩ F z ) → 0.

Since F ∩ F z ⊆ F , we have dist(Θ t(z), F) ≤ dist(Θ t(z), F ∩ F z ), hence 

dist(Θ t(z), F) < ε ∀t ≥ 0, dist(Θ t(z), F) → 0.

Because F is compact, the open cover {Wx}x∈F admits a finite subcover F ⊆ Smk=1 Wxk .Set 

W ε := 

> m

[

> k=1

Wxk ,THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 37 

an open neighborhood of F in X . Then for all z ∈ W ε,

dist(Θ t(z), F) < ε ∀t ≥ 0, dist(Θ t(z), F) → 0.

Since ε > 0 was arbitrary, this proves that F is stable and attracting for the strategy flow. Moreover, F is invariant by Proposition E.4. Hence F is an invariant asymptotically stable set, i.e., an attractor. Conversely, if F is an attractor for the strategy flow, then in particular it is attracting. By Proposition 1, F ∩ A is closed under better replies. Since F = span( B), we have F ∩ A = B,so B is closed under better replies. ■

Proof of Corollary 3 . First, we show strict Nash equilibria are attractors. Let α∗ ∈ A be such an equilibrium and identify it with the corresponding vertex of X . Then for every player i and every αi̸ = α∗ 

> i

we have ui(αi, α ∗−i) < u i(α∗), hence there is no arc α∗ → β

in the preference graph with β̸ = α∗. Therefore {α∗} is a club subgame. By Corollary 2, 

span( {α∗}) = {α∗} is an attractor for the strategy flow induced by (SD). Since it is a singleton, it contains no proper (nonempty) subset, hence it is minimal among attractors. Conversely, let M ⊆ X be a minimal attractor for the strategy flow. In particular M

is asymptotically stable. By Corollary F.1, there exists a nonempty set of pure profiles 

H ⊆ M ∩ A which is closed under better replies. Fix α0 ∈ H . Since the game is weakly acyclic, there exists a finite better-reply path 

α0 → α1 → · · · → αk

ending at a pure Nash equilibrium αk. Because H is closed under better replies and α0 ∈ H ,an immediate induction gives αj ∈ H for all j, hence αk ∈ H ⊆ M . Moreover, since the game has no ties, αk must be a strict Nash equilibrium. Now, by the first implication, strictness implies that {αk} is an attractor. Since {αk} ⊆ M and M is minimal among attractors, we conclude M = {αk}, i.e. M is a strict Nash equilibrium. ■

Proof of Remark 3. Note that, by definition, a finite game is an ordinal potential game if there exists Φ : A → R such that for every player i and every i-comparable α, α ′ ∈ A ,

ui(α′) > u i(α) ⇐⇒ Φ( α′) > Φ( α).

Now, if Φ is an ordinal potential, every arc α → α′ yields ui(α′) > u i(α) (no ties), hence 

Φ( α′) > Φ( α). Thus Φ strictly increases along directed edges, so no directed cycle exists. Conversely, if the preference graph is acyclic, fix a topological ordering α1, . . . , α |A| and set 

Φ( αk) = k. Then α → α′ implies Φ( α′) > Φ( α). For i-comparable α, α ′, the unique arc between them points toward the larger payoff. ■

G.3. When preference are not enough. We start with the counterexample. 

Proof of Proposition 2 . Players have two actions each: 

A1 = {F, B} (Front/Back ), A2 = {L, R} (Left/Right ), A3 = {T, B} (Top/Bottom ).

We abbreviate a pure profile α = ( α1, α 2, α 3) ∈ A by the three-letter word α1α2α3, e.g. 

FLT = (F , L, T) . Payoffs u(α) = ( u1, u 2, u 3) are: 

Front: 

L RT (1 , 0, 0) (0 , 1, 0) B (2 , 0, 10) (0 , 2, 0) 

Back: 

L RT (0 , 1, 1) (1 , 0, 1) B (0 , 0, 0) (1 , 1, 0) 38 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Figure 14: Cube X with coordinates (p, q, r ) = ( x1F , x 2R , x 3T ). The red vertices represent the unique club set, and the red shaded faces are its span. The blue vertex is a source vertex , meaning it has no incoming edge. In particular it is a repellor of the dynamics. The purple point x∗ = ( 12 , 12 , 1) is a Nash equilibrium of the game restricted to the face FT. Nonetheless, Player 3 has a deviation to the bottom in the neighborhood of that point, hence the dynamics are locally repelled from FT near x∗. This is what shall drive instability. 

Let H := A \ { BLB } and S := span( H) ⊆ X . In the preference graph of this game, 

BLB has no incoming arc and H is the unique club set (see Figure 14). In the cube 

X = ∆( A1) × ∆( A2) × ∆( A3), write the coordinates 

p := x1F ∈ [0 , 1] , q := x2R ∈ [0 , 1] , r := x3T ∈ [0 , 1] .

Then BLB corresponds to (p, q, r ) = (0 , 0, 0) and one checks 

S = {p = 1 } ∪ { q = 1 } ∪ { r = 1 }, (G.15) i.e. the union of the three square faces not containing BLB . Let also FT := {r = 1 }, i.e. player 3 plays T purely. Restricting to FT gives the 2-player game between players (1 , 2) :

L RB (0 , 1) (1 , 0) F (1 , 0) (0 , 1) 

hence the unique mixed equilibrium is 

p∗ = 12 , q∗ = 12 .

Define 

x∗ := ( p∗, q ∗, 1) = 

 12 , 12 , 1



∈ F T.

At x∗, player 3 has a strict profitable deviation to B:

v3T (x∗) = 1 − p∗ = 12 , v3B (x∗) = 10 p∗(1 − q∗) = 10 · 14 = 52 ,

so v3B (x∗) − v3T (x∗) = 2 > 0.We now consider the dynamics (FTRL). Write 

a := p − 12 , b := q − 12 , s := 1 − r, 

and let 

bx := ( x1, x 2, T) = ( p, q, 1) ∈ F T

be the projection of x = ( p, q, r ) onto the top face obtained by replacing player 3’s mixed action by the pure action T. The point x∗ = ( 12 , 12 , 1) is variationally stable for the game restricted to FT. Indeed, on the top face, 

v1F (bx) − v1B (bx) = −2b, v2R (bx) − v2L (bx) = 2 a, THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 39 

so 

⟨v1(bx), x 1 − x∗

> 1

⟩ + ⟨v2(bx), x 2 − x∗

> 2

⟩

= a v1F (bx) − v1B (bx) + b v2R (bx) − v2L (bx) = −2ab + 2 ab = 0 . (G.16) This cancellation is what will keep the first two players close to (1 /2, 1/2) while player 3

moves away from the top face. To quantify this, define the restricted Fenchel energy 

E(y) := F1(x∗

> 1

, y 1) + F2(x∗

> 2

, y 2).

Since ∇h∗ 

> i

(yi) = Qi(yi) = xi, differentiation along (FTRL) gives 

˙E = ⟨v1(x), x 1 − x∗

> 1

⟩ + ⟨v2(x), x 2 − x∗

> 2

⟩. (G.17) A direct calculation from the payoff table yields 

v1F (x) − v1B (x) = s

2 − (2 + s)b, v2R (x) − v2L (x) = 3s

2 + (2 − s)a, 

and 

v3B (x) − v3T (x) = 2 + 6 a − 5b − 10 ab. (G.18) Substituting the first two identities in (G.17), we obtain 

˙E = a

 s

2 − (2 + s)b



+ b

 3s

2 + (2 − s)a



= s

 a

2 + 3b

2 − 2ab 



. (G.19) This “tangential” energy is thus exactly conserved when s = 0 , in agreement with (G.16); away from the top face, its drift is proportional to the s. Let 

K := min {K1, K 2} > 0,

where Ki is the strong convexity constant of hi. Proposition D.3(1) gives 

Fi(x∗ 

> i

, y i) ≥ Ki

2 ∥xi − x∗ 

> i

∥22.

Since ∥x1 − x∗

> 1

∥22 = 2 a2 and ∥x2 − x∗

> 2

∥22 = 2 b2, it follows that 

E(y) ≥ K(a2 + b2). (G.20) Moreover, |a|, |b| ≤ 1/2, so 

a

2 + 3b

2 − 2ab ≤ 32 (|a| + |b|) ≤ 3

√2

pa2 + b2.

Combining this estimate with (G.19) and (G.20), we get 

˙E ≤ Cs √E, C := 3

√2K .

Applying this inequality to √E + δ and then letting δ ↓ 0 gives, for every interval on which the trajectory is defined, 

pE(y(t)) ≤ pE(y(0)) + C

2

Z t

> 0

s(u) du. (G.21) We next estimate the growth of s = x3B . Fix 

ρ := 120 , e0 := Kρ 2, d := 2 − 11 ρ − 10 ρ2 > 0.

By (G.20), 

E(y) < e 0 =⇒ |a| < ρ and |b| < ρ. (G.22) 40 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Figure 15: Three perspectives of (FTRL) under entropic regularization for this counterexample game. 

Hence, whenever E(y) < e 0, (G.18) gives 

v3B (x) − v3T (x) ≥ 2 − 6|a| − 5|b| − 10 |ab | ≥ d. 

For u ∈ (0 , 1) , set 

σ(u) := 1

θ′′  

> 3

(u) + θ′′  

> 3

(1 − u) > 0.

As long as 0 < s < 1, the support of player 3 is fixed, and the strategy equation (SD) reduces, in ∆( {T, B}), to 

˙s = σ(s) v3B (x) − v3T (x).

Indeed, writing m(u) = 1 /θ ′′  

> 3

(u), the coefficient of the payoff difference in (SD) is 

m(s)m(1 − s)

m(s) + m(1 − s) = 1

θ′′  

> 3

(s) + θ′′  

> 3

(1 − s) .

Therefore, on the region {E < e 0},

˙s ≥ d σ (s) > 0. (G.23) In particular, s is strictly increasing there. Moreover the quantity controlling the accumulated drift is 

Γ( η) := 

Z η

> 0

uσ(u) du =

Z η

> 0

u θ′′  

> 3

(u) + θ′′  

> 3

(1 − u) du. 

We claim that 

Γ( η) −→ 0 as η ↓ 0. (G.24) To see this, convexity gives, for u ∈ (0 , 1/2) ,

θ3(u) − θ3(0) ≤ uθ ′

> 3

(u) ≤ θ3(2 u) − θ3(u).

Since θ3 is continuous at 0, both outer terms converge to 0, so uθ ′

> 3

(u) → 0. Integration by parts then yields Z η

> 0

uθ ′′  

> 3

(u) du = ηθ ′

> 3

(η) − θ3(η) + θ3(0) −→ 0.

Also, θ′′  

> 3

is bounded near 1, so Z η

> 0

uθ ′′  

> 3

(1 − u) du = O(η2).

This proves (G.24). Now, choose 

0 < η < 12 − ρ (G.25) THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 41 

small enough that 

C

2d Γ( η) <

√e0

2 , (G.26) and define the neighborhood 

U := 

(

x ∈ X : dist( x, S) <

√22 η

)

.

Let V be an arbitrary neighborhood of S. For ε > 0, consider 

xε(0) := 

 12 , 12 , 1 − ε



.

As ε ↓ 0, this point converges to x∗ ∈ S , so xε(0) ∈ V for all sufficiently small ε. It is also an admissible initialization for (FTRL). Indeed, for a binary mixed action (w, 1 − w) with 

w ∈ (0 , 1) , the score pair  θ′

> i

(w), θ ′

> i

(1 − w)

has (w, 1 − w) as its unique regularized best response: the derivative of the one-dimensional maximization problem vanishes at w, and strict convexity gives uniqueness. Thus we may realize xε(0) by taking 

y1F (0) = y1B (0) = θ′

> 1

(1 /2) , y2L (0) = y2R (0) = θ′

> 2

(1 /2) ,

and 

y3T (0) = θ′

> 3

(1 − ε), y3B (0) = θ′

> 3

(ε)

for player 3. With this choice, 

E(y(0)) = 0 . (G.27) Fix 

0 < ε < η

2

small enough that xε(0) ∈ V , and let xε(t) be the corresponding trajectory. Define 

τ := inf {t ≥ 0 : E(y(t)) = e0 or s(t) = η} .

For 0 ≤ t < τ , we have E(y(t)) < e 0 and s(t) < η . Hence (G.23) applies, and, because s is increasing, 

Z t

> 0

s(u) du ≤ 1

d

Z t

> 0

s(u)

σ(s(u)) ˙s(u) du 

= 1

d

Z s(t)

> ε

vσ(v) dv ≤ 1

d Γ( η). (G.28) Combining (G.21), (G.27), (G.28), and (G.26), we obtain 

pE(y(t)) <

√e0

2 ∀t < τ. (G.29) By continuity, the same strict bound holds at t = τ whenever τ < ∞, so the event E = e0

cannot occur at time τ . Finally, τ is finite. Indeed, σ is continuous and strictly positive on 

[ε, η ], so 

σε,η := min  

> u∈[ε,η ]

σ(u) > 0.

If τ = ∞, then E(y(t)) < e 0 and s(t) < η for every t ≥ 0, and (G.23) would give 

˙s(t) ≥ d σ ε,η > 0 ∀t ≥ 0,42 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

forcing s to reach η in finite time, a contradiction. Hence τ < ∞; since the energy event is impossible, necessarily 

s(tη ) = η

for tη := τ , and (G.29) holds up to tη . At this time, (G.22) gives 

p(tη ) < 12 + ρ, q(tη ) < 12 + ρ. 

By (G.25), 

1 − p(tη ) > η, 1 − q(tη ) > η. 

Finally, by (G.15), the Euclidean distance to S is 

dist( x, S) = √2 min {1 − p, 1 − q, s }.

Therefore 

dist( x(tη ), S) = √2 η > 

√22 η, 

so x(tη ) /∈ U . On the other hand, 

dist( xε(0) , S) = √2 ε < 

√22 η, 

so xε(0) ∈ U ∩ V ∩ Im Q. We have found a fixed neighborhood U of S such that every neighborhood V of S contains an admissible initial condition whose trajectory under (FTRL) leaves U . Hence S is not stable under (FTRL). 

> ■

Remark G.1 . Note that in the game considered in the above proof, the vertex BLB is a repellor. Indeed, it has no incoming edge (see the blue vertex in Figure 14), so it is a strict Nash equilibrium of the negated game, hence an attractor for that game, and therefore (see Remark E.2) a repellor for our game. Consider then the dual attractor of BLB (see Appendix C.1 for definition of dual repellor/attractor). This attractor must contain the span of the unique club set (combining Theorem 2 and Corollary F.1), but it cannot coincide with that span since the latter is not stable by the previous proposition. Moreover, any larger span containing it would necessarily contain BLB, hence the dual attractor cannot be such a span either. Consequently, this attractor is not a span of pure profiles. ✦

Remark G.2 . Biggar & Papadimitriou [8] introduce the notion of a local source , defined as follows. Let x ∈ X , let H ⊆ A be a sink equilibrium (recall: a minimal nonempty club set), and set S = span( H). Let B be a subgame and let F = span( B) be its span. Then x

is a local source of H in F if: (1) x ∈ S ∩ F , (2) F ⊈ S, and (3) x is a quasi-strict Nash equilibrium of the negated game −u restricted to F.In our game, the point 

x∗ =

 12 , 12 , 1



is indeed a local source, with F = X . Conditions (1) and (2) hold because x∗ ∈ S while 

X ⊈ S. For condition (3), players 1 and 2 are indifferent between their two actions at x∗

and both actions belong to their supports. Player 3 plays T purely, and the strict payoff inequality 

v3B (x∗) − v3T (x∗) = 2 > 0

in the original game implies that T is the unique best response of player 3 in the negated game. Hence x∗ is a quasi-strict Nash equilibrium of −u on X .Accordingly, this example is consistent with the local source instability result of [8]. It is also special relative to their results in two respects. First, the instability proof above uses full-support initializations xε(0) ∈ X ◦ converging to x∗, so the escape occurs from the interior THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 43 

rather than from an initialization a proper subface, which would be incompatible with the (FTRL)-adapted notion of stability where initializations are defined as x(0) = Q(y(0)) , and thus must be contained in Im Q. Second, the argument applies to every (FTRL) dynamics satisfying our regularizer assumptions, whereas [8] work with (RD) only. ✦

Appendix H. Omitted proofs from Section 6 

We begin by proving that radness implies closedness under better replies: 

Proof of Proposition 3. We prove the elementary identity from which both claims follow directly. Let β ∈ H and let α ∈ A \ H be i-comparable with β, so α−i = β−i and αi̸ = βi.Then, for every j̸ = i, we have αj = βj , and hence 

uj (αj , β −j ) = uj (βj , β −j ) = uj (β).

Therefore 

Φ( β, α ) = X

> j∈N

 uj (αj , β −j ) − uj (β)

= ui(αi, β −i) − ui(β)= ui(α) − ui(β), (H.1) where the last equality uses α−i = β−i. ■

We have also an upgrade to mixed profiles: 

Lemma H.1. Let H ⊆ A . Then H is rad (resp. s-rad) if and only if for every α / ∈ H , and for every face F ⊆ span( H), we have sup x∈F Φ( x, α ) ≤ 0 (resp. sup x∈F Φ( x, α ) < 0) .Proof. The forward direction is trivial (just take F to be pure profile of H). For the other direction, fix α / ∈ H and a face F ⊆ span( H) and F = span( B) for some subgame B, so 

B ⊆ H . We have 

Φ( x, α ) = X

> i∈N

 viα (x) − ui(x),

so Φ( ·, α ) is multilinear. Next, we claim that for any multilinear f on F,

sup 

> x∈F

f (x) = max  

> β∈B

f (β). (H.2) This is classic, to see why it’s true, simply fix x−1 and consider x1 7 → f (x1, x −1), which is affine on ∆( B1), thus it attains its maximum at a vertex β1 with β1 ∈ B 1, giving f (x) ≤ f (β1, x −1).Iterating this argument over i = 2 , . . . , n yields some β = ( β1, . . . , β n) ∈ B with f (x) ≤ f (β)

for all x ∈ F . Applying (H.2) to f = Φ( ·, α ) and using B ⊆ H , we get by hypothesis 

sup 

> x∈F

Φ( x, α ) = max  

> β∈B

Φ( β, α ) ≤ 0 (resp. < 0). Since α / ∈ H and F ⊆ span( H) were arbitrary, H is rad (resp. s-rad). ■

To proceed, we shall prove the following lemma. 

Lemma H.2. Let H ⊆ A be s-rad and assume h is steep. Define the function 

¯FH(y) := X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ) ∈ [0 , ∞), y ∈ Y , (H.3) 

with the convention e−∞ = 0 . Then ¯FH is a local energy function for span( H).44 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

Proof. Set S := span( H) and define E : Y → [0 , ∞) by 

E(y) := ¯FH(y) = X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ).

If A \ H = ∅, then S = X and E = 0 , so all three items of Definition G.1 hold trivially. Assume henceforth that A \ H̸ = ∅.We start with regularity. By Proposition D.1(1), h∗ is C1 on Y and ∇h∗(y) = Q(y),hence, for every fixed α ∈ A ,

Fh(α, y ) = h(α) + h∗(y) − ⟨ y, α ⟩ is C1 with ∇Fh(α, y ) = Q(y) − α. 

Moreover, Fh(α, y ) ≥ 0 by Fenchel–Young, so exp( −Fh(α, y )) ∈ (0 , 1] . Differentiating gives 

∇



e−Fh(α, ·)

(y) = −e−Fh(α,y ) Q(y) − α.

Since Q(y) ∈ X for all y and α ∈ X is fixed, the vectors Q(y) − α are uniformly bounded, therefore the gradients above are uniformly bounded as well (because e−Fh(α,y ) ≤ 1). It follows that each map y 7 → e−Fh(α,y ) is globally Lipschitz and C1 on Y. Summing over the finite set A \ H shows that E is globally Lipschitz and C1, proving Definition G.1(1). Now positive semi-definiteness. Let (yk) be any sequence in Y and set xk := Q(yk). We first show that xk → S implies E(yk) → 0. Fix α / ∈ H . Since x 7 → xα = Q 

> i

xiα is continuous and xα = 0 for all x ∈ S by definition of span( H), we have xkα → 0. Let 

δkα := min  

> i∈N

xkiα i .

Because 0 ≤ xkiα i ≤ 1 and xkα = Q 

> i

xkiα i → 0, we must have δkα → 0. We claim that 

Fh(α, y k) → +∞, which implies e−Fh(α,y k ) → 0. Indeed, Assumption E.1 implies that h is steep, so Q(yk) ∈ X ◦ for all k, in particular all coordinates of xk are strictly positive. Thus, for each k and each player i, the KKT conditions in Proposition D.1(5) hold with νi ≡ 0,yielding a scalar λki ∈ R such that 

ykiβ = θ′

> i

(xkiβ ) + λki , ∀ β ∈ A i.

Fix k and choose an index j attaining the minimum in δkα, i.e. xkjα = δkα. Also choose βj ∈ A j

with xkjβ ≥ 1/|A j |. Using the definition of h∗ 

> j

and testing it at the pure action βj gives 

h∗ 

> j

(ykj ) ≥ ⟨ ykj , β j ⟩ − hj (βj ) = ykj − hj (βj ),

so 

Fj (αj , y kj ) = hj (αj ) + h∗ 

> j

(ykj ) − ykjα ≥ hj (αj ) − hj (βj ) +  ykjβ − ykjα 

.

By the KKT identity, ykjβ − ykjα = θ′ 

> j

(xkjβ ) − θ′ 

> j

(xkjα ). Since θ′ 

> j

is increasing and xkjβ ≥ 1/|A j |,we have θ′ 

> j

(xkjβ ) ≥ θ′ 

> j

(1 /|A j |), hence 

Fj (αj , y kj ) ≥



θ′ 

> j

(1 /|A j |) −  max 

> γ∈A j

hj (γj ) − min 

> γ∈A j

hj (γj )

− θ′ 

> j

(δkα).

Define for each i the constant 

Ci := θ′

> i

(1 /|A i|) −   max 

> γi∈A i

hi(γi) − min 

> γi∈A i

hi(γi) ∈ R.

Then the preceding inequality yields 

Fh(α, y k) = X

> j∈N

Fj (αj , y kj ) ≥ Fj (αj , y kj ) ≥ min 

> i∈N

 Ci − θ′

> i

(δkα).THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 45 

Since we are in the steep regime, θ′

> i

(p) → −∞ as p ↓ 0 for each i. Because δkα → 0 and 

N is finite, the right-hand side diverges to +∞. Hence Fh(α, y k) → +∞ and therefore 

e−Fh(α,y k ) → 0. As A \ H is finite, summing over α / ∈ H yields E(yk) → 0.Conversely, assume E(yk) → 0. We show that xk → S . Fix α / ∈ H and suppose, for contradiction, that xkα ↛ 0. Then there exist ε > 0 and a subsequence (not relabeled) such that xkα ≥ ε for all k, so in particular xkiα i ≥ ε for all players i (since each factor is ≤ 1). Fix such an i. By the same KKT identity as above (valid because xk ∈ X ◦), we have 

max 

> βi∈A i

ykiβ − ykiα i = max 

> βi∈A i

θ′

> i

(xkiβ ) − θ′

> i

(xkiα i ) ≤ θ′

> i

(1) − θ′

> i

(ε) =: Mi(ε) < ∞.

Hence ykiα ≥ max β ykiβ − Mi(ε). On the other hand, by definition of h∗ 

> i

,

h∗ 

> i

(yki ) = sup 

> wi∈X i

 ⟨yki , w i⟩ − hi(wi) ≤ max 

> βi∈A i

ykiβ − min 

> wi∈X i

hi(wi).

Combining these two bounds gives 

Fi(αi, y ki ) = hi(αi) + h∗ 

> i

(yki ) − ykiα ≤ hi(αi) − min 

> Xi

hi + Mi(ε) =: C′

> i

(ε) < ∞.

Summing over i yields a finite constant C′(ε) = P 

> i

C′

> i

(ε) such that Fh(α, y k) ≤ C′(ε)

along the subsequence, hence e−Fh(α,y k ) ≥ e−C′(ε) > 0 along the same subsequence. This contradicts E(yk) → 0, since E(yk) ≥ e−Fh(α,y k ). Therefore xkα → 0 for every α / ∈ H . Now define the continuous function g : X → [0 , ∞) by g(x) := P 

> α / ∈H

xα. We have g(x) = 0 

if and only if x ∈ S , and the above shows g(xk) → 0. If xk ↛ S, there exist ε0 > 0

and a subsequence xkj with dist( xkj , S) ≥ ε0. By compactness of X , pass to a further subsequence with xkj → ¯x ∈ X . Continuity of g gives g(¯ x) = 0 , hence ¯x ∈ S , contradicting 

dist( xkj , S) ≥ ε0 for j large. Thus xk → S . This proves Definition G.1(2). Finally, dissipativity. Let y be any solution orbit of (FTRL) and set x := Q(y). For each 

α / ∈ H , summing Lemma D.2 over players gives 

ddt Fh(α, y ) = X

> i∈N

⟨vi(x), x i − αi⟩ = X

> i∈N

 ui(x) − viα (x) = − Φ( x, α ),

where we used ui(x) = ⟨vi(x), x i⟩ and the definition of Φ( ·, α ). Therefore, 

ddt e−Fh(α,y ) = −e−Fh(α,y ) ddt Fh(α, y ) = e−Fh(α,y ) Φ( x, α ).

Summing over α / ∈ H yields the derivative of E along (FTRL): 

˙E(y) = X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ) Φ( Q(y), α ). (H.4) We now exploit strict radness. Fix α / ∈ H . For any x ∈ S , let F be the (minimal) face of X containing x, then F ⊆ S . By Lemma H.1, sup z∈F Φ( z, α ) < 0, hence Φ( x, α ) ≤

sup z∈F Φ( z, α ) < 0. Thus Φ( ·, α ) < 0 on S. Since Φ( ·, α ) is continuous and S is compact, the maximum mα := max x∈S Φ( x, α ) exists and satisfies mα < 0. Because A \ H is finite, the constant 

c := − max  

> α / ∈H

mα > 0

is well-defined and satisfies Φ( x, α ) ≤ − c for all x ∈ S and all α / ∈ H . By continuity, there exists a neighborhood U of S in X such that 

Φ( x, α ) ≤ − c

2 ∀ x ∈ U, ∀ α / ∈ H .46 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

By Definition G.1(2) already established, there exists ¯E > 0 such that E(y) < ¯E implies 

Q(y) ∈ U (otherwise, one could find yk with E(yk) → 0 but Q(yk) /∈ U , contradicting 

Q(yk) → S ). Hence, for any y with E(y) ≤ ¯E, we have x = Q(y) ∈ U and thus, using (H.4), 

˙E(y) = X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ) Φ( x, α ) ≤ − c

2

X

> α / ∈H

e−Fh(α,y ) = − c

2 E(y).

Consequently, if 0 < E − < E + ≤ ¯E and E− < E (y) < E +, then ˙E(y) ≤ − (c/ 2) E− < 0.Taking the supremum over {y : E− < E (y) < E +} gives Definition G.1(3). All three conditions of Definition G.1 are satisfied, so ¯FH is a local energy function for 

span( H). ■

We may now use this to deduce the main theorem. 

Proof of Theorem 4. We shall proceed again by gluing all the facewise basins into a basin on all of X . Let S := span( H). Under Assumption E.1, the regularizer is steep, so the facewise FTRL dynamics are well-defined. Moreover, S is a union of faces, so compact and each face is invariant under the strategy flow, hence S is invariant. It remains to prove that S is asymptotically stable for the strategy flow. Fix any face 

F of X with SF := S ∩ F̸ = ∅, and write F = span( B) for the corresponding subgame 

B = Q 

> i

Bi ⊆ A . Define HF := H ∩ B . We claim 

SF = span( HF ). (H.5) Indeed, if x ∈ S ∩ F , then xα = 0 for every α / ∈ H (since x ∈ span( H)) and also xα = 0 

for every α / ∈ B (since x ∈ span( B)), therefore xα = 0 for every α / ∈ (H ∩ B ) = HF , i.e. 

x ∈ span( HF ). Conversely, span( HF ) ⊆ span( H) ∩ span( B) = S ∩ F , proving (H.5). Next, we show that HF is s-rad for the restricted game on B. Fix α ∈ B \ H F . Then 

α / ∈ H . Let G be any face with G ⊆ span( HF ). By (H.5), G ⊆ span( H). Since H is s-rad (cf. Lemma H.1), we have 

sup 

> x∈G

Φ( x, α ) < 0.

Since α ∈ B and G ⊆ span( B), this is exactly the s-radness requirement for HF within B.Now consider the face-restricted choice map QB : Y → F ◦ and the facewise FTRL dynamics 

˙y = v(x), x = QB(y), (FTRL-B)as in Remark E.3. Since h is steep and HF is strictly rad, the radness energy construction (cf. Lemma H.2) provides a local energy function for span( HF ) = SF of the form 

¯FHF (y) = X

> α∈B\H F

e−Fh|F (α,y ).

Therefore, by the continuous-time energy theorem (cf. Theorem G.1), SF is asymptotically stable under the facewise FTRL dynamics. Finally, by Remark E.3, for every initial condition 

x0 ∈ F the strategy flow trajectory starting at x0 coincides with the appropriate facewise FTRL orbit on the minimal face of F containing x0. It follows that SF is asymptotically stable for the restriction of the strategy flow to F. Concretely: for each such face F there exists a neighborhood UF ⊆ F of SF (relative topology) such that every strategy flow trajectory starting in UF remains in UF and satisfies dist(Θ t, SF ) → 0 as t → ∞ .We now patch these facewise basins into a basin for S in X . Let FS be the (finite) family of faces F of X with SF̸ = ∅, and fix for each F ∈ FS a neighborhood UF ⊆ F with the invariance/attraction property above. Fix x ∈ S and set 

F(x) := {F ∈ FS : x ∈ F} .THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 47 

Because X has finitely many faces, the number 

rx := 12 min {dist( x, F′) : F′ a face of X , x / ∈ F ′}

is well-defined and strictly positive. In particular, Brx (x) ∩ X meets only faces that contain 

x. Moreover, for each F ∈ F(x), since UF is a neighborhood of x in F (relative topology), there exists ρx 

> F

> 0 such that Bρx 

> F

(x) ∩ F ⊆ UF . Define 

ρx := min 



rx, min  

> F∈ F(x)

ρx

> F



> 0.

Then for every z ∈ Bρx (x) ∩ X , every face of X containing z must contain x (since it meets Brx (x) ∩ X ), so the minimal face Fz containing z contains x, hence Fz ∈ F(x), by construction, this implies z ∈ UFz . Consequently, the family {Bρx (x) ∩ X } x∈S covers S. By compactness of S, choose x1, . . . , x m ∈ S with 

S ⊆ U := 

> m

[

> k=1

 Bρxk (xk) ∩ X ,

so U is an open neighborhood of S in X .

Attraction. Take any Θ0 ∈ U and let F be the minimal face of X containing Θ0. By construction of U , there exists some k such that Θ0 ∈ Bρxk (xk) ∩ X , hence Θ0 ∈ UF by the preceding argument. Since F is invariant under the strategy flow, the trajectory t 7 → Θt(Θ 0)

remains in F. Since Θ0 ∈ UF , it remains in UF and satisfies 

dist  Θt(Θ 0), SF

 −−−→ 

> t→∞

0.

Because SF ⊆ S , we have dist(Θ t(Θ 0), S) ≤ dist(Θ t(Θ 0), SF ) → 0, proving that S attracts 

U .

Stability. Let W be an arbitrary neighborhood of S in X . For each F ∈ FS , the set 

W ∩ F is a neighborhood of SF in the relative topology of F. Since SF is stable for the restricted flow on F, there exists a neighborhood VF ⊆ F of SF such that x0 ∈ VF implies 

Θt(x0) ∈ W ∩ F for all t ≥ 0. Repeating the compactness/ball-cover construction above with (VF )F∈ FS in place of (UF )F∈ FS yields an open neighborhood V of S in X such that every x0 ∈ V lies in VFx0 , where Fx0 is the minimal face containing x0, hence Θt(x0) ∈ W

for all t ≥ 0. Thus S is stable. We have shown that S is compact, invariant, and asymptotically stable for the strategy flow. It follows then that span( H) = S is an attractor for the strategy flow induced by (SD). ■

In the entropic setting, we shall work with a much simpler energy function: 

Lemma H.3. Let H ⊆ A and assume h is entropic. Define 

¯WH(x) := X

> α / ∈H

xα, x ∈ X .

Then, if H is rad and closed under better replies, ¯WH ◦ Q is a local energy function for 

span( H).Proof. Set S := span( H) and define 

E : Y → [0 , 1] , E(y) := ¯WH(Q(y)) .

If A \ H = ∅, then S = X and ¯WH = 0 , hence E = 0 , and the three items of Definition G.1 hold trivially. Assume henceforth A \ H̸ = ∅.We start with regularity. Since h is entropic, Q is the softmax, hence C∞. Moreover by Proposition D.1(1), it is globally Lipschitz. Next, ¯WH is a polynomial in the coordinates xiα 48 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

because each monomial xα = Q 

> i

xiα is polynomial, thus ¯WH ∈ C∞(X ) and is Lipschitz on compact X . Therefore E = ¯WH ◦ Q is C1 and globally Lipschitz on Y.For positive semi-definiteness, ¯WH(x) is a sum of nonnegative terms, so 

¯WH(x) = 0 ⇐⇒ xα = 0 ∀α / ∈ H ⇐⇒ x ∈ S ,

hence 

S = ¯W −1 

> H

(0) . (H.6) We do again the basic subsequence argument. Let (yk) be any sequence and set xk := Q(yk) ∈X . If xk → S , then by continuity of ¯WH and (H.6), E(yk) = ¯WH(xk) → 0. Conversely, if 

E(yk) = ¯WH(xk) → 0 but xk̸ → S , then there exist ε0 > 0 and a subsequence xkj with 

dist( xkj , S) ≥ ε0 for all j. By compactness of X , pass to a further subsequence (not relabeled) with xkj → ¯x ∈ X . Continuity gives ¯WH(¯ x) = 0 , so ¯x ∈ S by (H.6). Since x 7 → dist( x, S) is continuous and dist(¯ x, S) = 0 , we get dist( xkj , S) → 0, contradicting dist( xkj , S) ≥ ε0 for j

large. Hence xk → S .We now turn to dissipativity. Let y be any solution orbit of (FTRL) and set x := Q(y).In the entropic case, the induced strategy flow coincides with the replicator dynamics 

˙xiα = xiα 

 viα (x) − ui(x), i ∈ N , α i ∈ A i. (H.7) By steepness, xiα > 0 for all i and αi ∈ A i. The product rule and (H.7) then give 

ddt xα = xα

X

> i∈N

˙xiα i

xiα i

= xα

X

> i∈N

 viα (x) − ui(x).

Also 

Φ( x, α ) = X

> i∈N

 viα (x) − ui(x),

so we obtain the pointwise identity 

˙xα = xα Φ( x, α ). (H.8) Summing (H.8) over α / ∈ H yields, along the orbit, 

ddt ¯WH(x) = X

> α / ∈H

xα Φ( x, α ). (H.9) Equivalently, for every y ∈ Y ,

˙E(y) = X

> α / ∈H

xα Φ( x, α ), x = Q(y). (H.10) Define the continuous function 

ϕ(x) := X

> α / ∈H

xα Φ( x, α ), x ∈ X .

By (H.10), it is enough to show that ϕ is strictly negative whenever the “mass outside H”, namely ¯WH(x), is positive but small: we will prove that there exists ¯E > 0 such that 

0 < ¯WH(x) ≤ ¯E =⇒ φ(x) < 0. (H.11) Fix x⋆ ∈ S . Set Bi := supp( x⋆i ) and B := Q 

> i∈N

Bi. Since x⋆ ∈ S , we have B ⊆ H . Let 

F := span( B), then x⋆ ∈ F ◦. For α ∈ A define the deviating coalition from B:

DB(α) := {i ∈ N : αi /∈ B i},THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 49 

and on A \ H introduce the preorder ⪯B by: α ⪯B ν if and only if DB(α) ⊆ DB(ν) and 

αi = νi for all i ∈ DB(α). Let MB ⊆ A \ H be the set of ⪯B-minimal excluded profiles, and set 

¯WB(x) := X

> α∈MB

xα.

Notice that the profiles in MB are those which are “closest” to B, in the sense that they’re one unilateral deviation away from it: this is how we can exploit clubness to get a negative contribution. 

Claim 1. If α ∈ MB, i ∈ DB(α), and βi ∈ B i, then (βi, α −i) ∈ H . Indeed, let γ = ( βi, α −i).Then DB(γ) = DB(α) \ { i} ⊊ DB(α) and γj = αj for all j ∈ DB(γ), hence γ ⪯B α with 

γ̸ = α. If γ / ∈ H , this contradicts the ⪯B-minimality of α ∈ MB, therefore γ ∈ H .

Claim 2. There exist a neighborhood U of x⋆ in X and γ ∈ (0 , 1) such that 

x ∈ U \ S =⇒ ¯WB(x) ≥ γ ¯WH(x). (H.12) Indeed, let n := |N | and set 

δ := 12 min  

> i∈N , β i∈B i

x⋆iβ > 0.

By continuity of x 7 → xiβ , there exists a neighborhood U0 of x⋆ such that 

xiβ ≥ δ ∀x ∈ U0, ∀i ∈ N , ∀βi ∈ B i. (H.13) Define 

ε(x) := max 

> i∈N

X 

> αi/∈B i

xiα i .

Since ε(x⋆) = 0 , shrink U0 so that ε(x) ≤ ε0 ≤ δ for all x ∈ U0, where ε0 > 0 will be fixed below. Fix ν ∈ (A \ H ) \ MB. Let μ = μ(ν) be any ⪯B-minimal element of the nonempty set {α ∈ A \ H : α ⪯B ν}. Then μ ∈ MB and μ ⪯B ν. Moreover DB(μ) ⊊ DB(ν): if 

DB(μ) = DB(ν), then μi = νi for all i ∈ DB(ν) and also μ ⪯B ν and ν ⪯B μ, so ν would be 

⪯B-minimal as well, contradicting ν / ∈ MB. We claim that for all x ∈ U0,

xν ≤ C ε (x) xμ, C := δ−n. (H.14) If xμ = 0 , then xν = 0 as well, hence (H.14) holds: indeed, if xμ = 0 then some index j

has xjμ = 0 . By (H.13) this forces j ∈ DB(μ), and since μj = νj for all j ∈ DB(μ) we get 

xjν = 0 and thus xν = 0 . Assume now xμ > 0 and write 

xν

xμ

= Y

> i∈N

xiν 

xiμ 

.

If i ∈ DB(μ) then μi = νi, so the factor equals 1. If i ∈ DB(ν) \ DB(μ) then μi ∈ B i and 

νi /∈ B i, hence by (H.13) and the definition of ε(x),

xiμ ≥ δ, xiν ≤ X 

> αi/∈B i

xiα ≤ ε(x), ⇒ xiν 

xiμ 

≤ ε(x)

δ .

Finally, if i / ∈ DB(ν) then νi ∈ B i, and also μi ∈ B i (else i ∈ DB(μ) ⊆ DB(ν)), so xiμ ≥ δ

by (H.13) and trivially xiν ≤ 1, hence xiν /x iμ ≤ 1/δ . Since ν / ∈ H and B ⊆ H , we have 

ν / ∈ B and thus DB(ν)̸ = ∅, implying n − | DB(ν)| ≤ n − 1. Also DB(μ) ⊊ DB(ν) implies 

|DB(ν) \ DB(μ)| ≥ 1. Using ε(x) ≤ δ on U0 gives 

xν

xμ

≤

 ε(x)

δ

 1

δ

n−1

= δ−n ε(x) = C ε (x),50 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

proving (H.14). Summing (H.14) over ν ∈ (A \ H ) \ MB yields, for all x ∈ U0,

¯WH(x) = ¯WB(x) + X

> ν∈(A\H )\MB

xν ≤ ¯WB(x) + C ε (x) |A \ H| ¯WB(x).

Choose ε0 so that C ε 0 |A \ H| ≤ 12 , and set U := U0 with this choice. Then for all x ∈ U we have ¯WH(x) ≤ 32 ¯WB(x), i.e. (H.12) holds with γ := 2 /3.Next, since H is club, every unilateral deviation from H to A \ H is strictly unprofitable. Formally, let E be the finite set of triples (β, α, i ) such that β ∈ H , α / ∈ H , and α and βi-comparable. For (β, α, i ) ∈ E , closure under better replies implies ui(α) < u i(β), hence define 

η := min 

> (β,α,i )∈E

 ui(β) − ui(α) > 0.

If α, β differ only in i, then for j̸ = i we have uj (αj , β −j ) = uj (β), so 

Φ( β, α ) = X

> j∈N

 uj (αj , β −j ) − uj (β) = ui(α) − ui(β) ≤ − η. (H.15) We now estimate ϕ(x) for x near S. Fix α ∈ A . Since x 7 → Φ( x, α ) is multilinear (being a finite sum of multilinear payoff terms), for every x ∈ X we have the multilinear interpolation identity 

Φ( x, α ) = X

> β∈A

xβ Φ( β, α ), (H.16) obtained by expanding successively in each block xi. Using (H.16), 

ϕ(x) = X

> α / ∈H

X

> β∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α ) + X

> α / ∈H

X

> β / ∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α ). (H.17) Let D := max α,β ∈A |Φ( β, α )| < ∞. Then the second term in (H.17) is bounded above by 

X

> α / ∈H

X

> β / ∈H

xαxβ |Φ( β, α )| ≤ D

 X 

> α / ∈H

xα

2

= D ¯WH(x)2.

For the first term, radness gives Φ( β, α ) ≤ 0 for all α / ∈ H and all β ∈ H , hence the first term is ≤ 0. To obtain strict negativity when x / ∈ S but is close to x⋆, we focus on the minimal excluded profiles. Fix α ∈ MB and choose any i(α) ∈ DB(α). Pick βi(α) ∈ B i(α)

maximizing xi(α)β over Bi(α), and set 

β(α) := ( βi(α), α −i(α)).

By Claim 1, β(α) ∈ H , and α and β(α) differ only in player i(α), so by (H.15), Φ( β(α), α ) ≤−η. Therefore, using again Φ( β, α ) ≤ 0 for β ∈ H ,

X

> α / ∈H

X

> β∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α ) ≤ X

> α∈MB

xαxβ(α) Φ( β(α), α ) ≤ − η X

> α∈MB

xαxβ(α).

For x ∈ U from Claim 2 and α ∈ MB, we have βi(α) ∈ B i(α), so (H.13) gives xi(α)β ≥ δ,while αi(α) /∈ B i(α) implies xi(α)α ≤ ε(x). Hence, whenever xα > 0,

xβ(α) = xα

xi(α)β

xi(α)α

≥ xα

δε(x) ,

and the same inequality holds trivially if xα = 0 . Thus 

xαxβ(α) ≥ δε(x) x2

> α

, α ∈ MB.THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 51 

Consequently, 

X

> α / ∈H

X

> β∈H

xαxβ Φ( β, α ) ≤ − η δε(x)

X

> α∈MB

x2 

> α

≤ − η δ

|MB| ε(x) ¯WB(x)2,

where we used P 

> α∈MB

x2 

> α

≥ | MB|−1  P  

> α∈MB

xα

2 = |MB|−1 ¯WB(x)2. Combining with the bound on the second term in (H.17) and (H.12) yields, for all x ∈ U \ S ,

ϕ(x) ≤ − η δ

|MB| ε(x) ¯WB(x)2 + D ¯WH(x)2 ≤ ¯WB(x)2

−η δ

|MB| ε(x) + D γ −2

.

Note that on U \ S we have ε(x) > 0 (if ε(x) = 0 then xi is supported on Bi for every i,and since B ⊆ H this forces x ∈ S ). Since ε(x⋆) = 0 and ε is continuous, we may shrink U

(keeping x⋆ ∈ U ) so that 

ε(x) ≤ η δ γ 2

2D |MB| ∀x ∈ U. 

Then the bracket is strictly negative for all x ∈ U \ S , hence ϕ(x) < 0 on U \ S .Since x⋆ ∈ S was arbitrary, these neighborhoods form an open cover of compact S.Extracting a finite subcover and letting U be the union, we obtain an open neighborhood U

of S such that 

ϕ(x) < 0 ∀x ∈ U \ S . (H.18) Because ¯WH is continuous, S = ¯W −1 

> H

(0) , and X \ U is compact and disjoint from S,

¯E := inf 

> x∈X \ U

¯WH(x) > 0.

Then {x ∈ X : 0 < ¯WH(x) ≤ ¯E} ⊆ U \ S , and (H.11) follows from (H.18). Finally, let 

0 < E − < E + ≤ ¯E and consider the compact set 

K := {x ∈ X : E− ≤ ¯WH(x) ≤ E+} ⊆ { x : 0 < ¯WH(x) ≤ ¯E}.

By (H.11), ϕ(x) < 0 for all x ∈ K, hence max x∈K ϕ(x) < 0 by continuity. Using (H.10), for any y with E− < E (y) < E + we have x = Q(y) ∈ K and ˙E(y) = ϕ(x), so 

sup { ˙E(y) : E− < E (y) < E +} ≤ max  

> x∈K

ϕ(x) < 0,

which is exactly Definition G.1(3). Hence E = ¯WH ◦ Q is a local energy function for 

S = span( H). ■

From this, as usual, we get asymptotic stability. 

Proof of Theorem 5. If A \ H = ∅, then span( H) = X , hence it is (trivially) an attractor for (RD). Assume henceforth A \ H̸ = ∅, and set S := span( H). Since h is entropic the induced strategy flow (Θ t)t∈R is well-defined and face-invariant, moreover it coincides with the replicator dynamics (RD). In particular, by Proposition E.4 every face of X is invariant for (Θ t). As S is a union of faces, it follows that S is compact and invariant. We will prove that S is asymptotically stable for (Θ t), hence an attractor. Comes again the time for some gluing: we shall patch the facewise basins into a basin on all of X . Let F = Q 

> i∈N

∆( Bi) be a face of X and write A(F) := Q 

> i∈N

Bi for its vertex set. Define 

HF := H ∩ A (F), SF := S ∩ F .

Then 

SF = span( HF ). (H.19) Indeed, if x ∈ S F , then supp( x) ⊆ A (F) (since x ∈ F ) and supp( x) ⊆ H (since x ∈ span( H)), so supp( x) ⊆ H ∩ A (F) = HF , i.e. x ∈ span( HF ), and the reverse inclusion is immediate. 52 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

We claim now that HF is rad and club for the dynamics restricted to F. For radness, let F′ ⊆ F be any face with F′ ⊆ span( HF ) and let α ∈ A (F) \ H F . Then α / ∈ H and 

F′ ⊆ span( H) = S, so by radness of H and Lemma H.1, 

sup 

> x∈F ′

Φ( x, α ) ≤ 0.

the preceding inequality is exactly the rad condition for HF on F. For closure under better replies, let β ∈ H F and suppose β → α is a better-reply edge with α ∈ A (F). Then also 

β ∈ H and β → α is a better-reply edge in the full game, so α ∈ H because H is closed under better replies. As α ∈ A (F), this gives α ∈ H ∩ A (F) = HF .Fix a face F with SF̸ = ∅, and consider the face-restricted choice map QB : Y → F ◦ and the corresponding facewise FTRL dynamics (FTRL-B). Apply Lemma H.3 to the subgame on F (action sets Bi) and the set HF ⊆ A (F): by the previous paragraph, HF is rad and club on F, so 

EF (y) := ¯WHF

 QB(y)

is a local energy function for SF = span( HF ) under (FTRL-B). Hence, by Theorem G.1, 

SF is asymptotically stable under (FTRL-B). By Remark E.3, the strategy flow trajectory starting from any x0 ∈ F coincides with the orbit of (FTRL-B) on the minimal face of F

containing x0, therefore SF is asymptotically stable for the restriction of the strategy flow to 

F. Concretely: for each face F with SF̸ = ∅, there exists a neighborhood UF ⊆ F of SF (in the relative topology of F) such that every strategy flow trajectory starting in UF remains in UF and satisfies dist(Θ t, SF ) → 0.Let now FS be the (finite) collection of faces F of X such that SF̸ = ∅, and for each such 

F let UF ⊆ F be as above. Fix any point x ∈ S . Let F(x) := {F ∈ FS : x ∈ F} . Because 

X has finitely many faces, the quantity 

rx := 12 min {dist( x, F′) : F′ a face of X , x / ∈ F ′}

is well-defined and strictly positive. In particular, Brx (x) ∩ X meets only faces that contain 

x. Moreover, for each F ∈ F(x), since UF is a neighborhood of x in F, there exists ρx 

> F

> 0

such that Bρx 

> F

(x) ∩ F ⊆ UF . Set 

ρx := min 



rx, min  

> F∈ F(x)

ρx

> F



> 0.

Then for every z ∈ Bρx (x) ∩ X , the (unique) minimal face Fz containing z must contain x,hence belongs to F(x), and therefore z ∈ UFz . Thus the family {Bρx (x) ∩ X } x∈S covers S.By compactness of S, there exist x1, . . . , x m ∈ S such that 

S ⊆ U := 

> m

[

> k=1

 Bρxk (xk) ∩ X ,

and U is an open neighborhood of S in X . Now take any Θ0 ∈ U and let F be the minimal face of X containing Θ0. By construction of U , F contains some xk ∈ S and Θ0 ∈ UF . Since faces are invariant (Proposition E.4), Θt ∈ F for all t ≥ 0, and we have dist(Θ t, SF ) → 0.As SF ⊆ S , this implies dist(Θ t, S) → 0. This proves that S is attracting. The stability part is obtained by the same patching argument, using the stability component of asymptotic stability on each F ∈ FS .Therefore S = span( H) is compact, invariant, and asymptotically stable for the strategy flow, hence an attractor. Since this flow coincides with (RD) in the entropic case, span( H)

is an attractor under (RD). ■THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 53 

References 

[1] Alongi, J. M. and Nelson, G. S. Recurrence and Topology , volume 85 of Graduate Studies in Mathematics .American Mathematical Society, 2007. [2] Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P. F., Schulman, J., and Mané, D. Concrete problems in AI safety. https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565 , 2016. [3] Andrade, G. P., Frongillo, R. M., and Piliouras, G. Learning in matrix games can be arbitrarily complex. In COLT ’21: Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference on Learning Theory , 2021. [4] Balseiro, S., Lu, H., and Mirrokni, V. Dual mirror descent for online allocation problems. In ICML ’20: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. [5] Beck, A. and Teboulle, M. Mirror descent and nonlinear projected subgradient methods for convex optimization. Operations Research Letters , 31(3):167–175, 2003. [6] Benaïm, M. Dynamics of stochastic approximation algorithms. In Azéma, J., Émery, M., Ledoux, M., and Yor, M. (eds.), Séminaire de Probabilités XXXIII , volume 1709 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics ,pp. 1–68. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1999. [7] Benaïm, M., Hofbauer, J., and Sorin, S. Perturbations of set-valued dynamical systems, with applications to game theory. Dynamic Games and Applications , 2(2):195–205, 2012. [8] Biggar, O. and Papadimitriou, C. H. Sink equilibria and the attractors of learning in games. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2502.07975 , 2025. [9] Biggar, O. and Papadimitriou, C. H. Computing stable limit cycles of learning in games. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2602.11315 , 2026. [10] Biggar, O. and Shames, I. The replicator dynamic, chain components and the response graph. In ALT ’23: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory , 2023. [11] Biggar, O. and Shames, I. The attractor of the replicator dynamic in zero-sum games. In ALT ’24: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory , 2024. [12] Biggar, O. and Shames, I. Preference graphs: a combinatorial tool for game theory. https://arxiv. org/abs/2502.03546 , 2025. [13] Boone, V. and Mertikopoulos, P. The equivalence of dynamic and strategic stability under regularized learning in games. In NeurIPS ’23: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [14] Cauvin, P.-L., Legacci, D., and Mertikopoulos, P. The impact of uncertainty on regularized learning in games. In ICML ’25: Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [15] Cesa-Bianchi, N. and Lugosi, G. Prediction, Learning, and Games . Cambridge University Press, 2006. [16] Cheung, Y. K. and Piliouras, G. Vortices instead of equilibria in minmax optimization: Chaos and butterfly effects of online learning in zero-sum games. In COLT ’19: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference on Learning Theory , 2019. [17] Christiano, P. F., Leike, J., Brown, T. B., Martic, M., Legg, S., and Amodei, D. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In NIPS ’17: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. [18] Coucheney, P., Gaujal, B., and Mertikopoulos, P. Penalty-regulated dynamics and robust learning procedures in games. Mathematics of Operations Research , 40(3):611–633, August 2015. [19] Daskalakis, C., Goldberg, P. W., and Papadimitriou, C. H. The complexity of computing a Nash equilibrium. SIAM Journal on Computing , 39(1):195–259, 2009. [20] Debreu, G. Representation of a preference ordering by a numerical function. In Thrall, R. M., Coombs, C. H., and Davis, R. L. (eds.), Decision Processes , pp. 159–165. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1954. [21] Feng, Y., Piliouras, G., and Wang, X. Prediction accuracy of learning in games: follow-the-regularized-leader meets Heisenberg. In ICML ’24: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [22] Flokas, L., Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, E. V., Lianeas, T., Mertikopoulos, P., and Piliouras, G. No-regret learning and mixed Nash equilibria: They do not mix. In NeurIPS ’20: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. [23] Fudenberg, D. and Levine, D. K. The Theory of Learning in Games , volume 2 of Economic learning and social evolution . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1998. [24] Gaunersdorfer, A. and Hofbauer, J. Fictitious play, Shapley polygons, and the replicator equation. 

Games and Economic Behavior , 11(2):279–303, 1995. 54 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

[25] Geist, M., Scherrer, B., and Pietquin, O. A theory of regularized Markov decision processes. In ICML ’19: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2019. [26] Giannou, A., Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, E. V., and Mertikopoulos, P. Survival of the strictest: Stable and unstable equilibria under regularized learning with partial information. In COLT ’21: Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference on Learning Theory , 2021. [27] Giannou, A., Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis, E. V., and Mertikopoulos, P. The convergence rate of regularized learning in games: From bandits and uncertainty to optimism and beyond. In NeurIPS ’21: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. [28] Goemans, M., Mirrokni, V., and Vetta, A. Sink equilibria and convergence. In FOCS ’05: Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , 2005. [29] Guo, W., Jordan, M. I., and Vitercik, E. No-regret learning in partially-informed auctions. In ICML ’22: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022. [30] Hadfield-Menell, D., Russell, S. J., Abbeel, P., and Dragan, A. D. Cooperative inverse reinforcement learning. In NIPS ’16: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2016. [31] Hakim, R., Milionis, J., Papadimitriou, C. H., and Piliouras, G. Swim till you sink: Computing the limit of a game. In SAGT ’24: Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory , pp. 205–222, 2024. [32] Hannan, J. Approximation to Bayes risk in repeated play. In Dresher, M., Tucker, A. W., and Wolfe, P. (eds.), Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume III , volume 39 of Annals of Mathematics Studies ,pp. 97–139. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1957. [33] Hart, S. and Mas-Colell, A. Uncoupled dynamics do not lead to Nash equilibrium. American Economic Review , 93(5):1830–1836, 2003. [34] Hazan, E. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends in Optimization , 2(3-4): 157–325, 2016. [35] Hofbauer, J. and Sigmund, K. Evolutionary Games and Population Dynamics . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1998. [36] Hofbauer, J., Sorin, S., and Viossat, Y. Time average replicator and best reply dynamics. Mathematics of Operations Research , 34(2):263–269, May 2009. [37] Hsieh, Y.-P., Mertikopoulos, P., and Cevher, V. The limits of min-max optimization algorithms: Convergence to spurious non-critical sets. In ICML ’21: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2021. [38] Johnston, T., Savery, M., Scott, A., and Tarbush, B. Game connectivity and adaptive dynamics. 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10609 , 2023. [39] Jordan, J. S. Three problems in learning mixed strategy Nash equilibria. Games and Economic Behavior ,5(3):368–386, July 1993. [40] Kleinberg, R. D., Ligett, K., Piliouras, G., and Tardos, É. Beyond the Nash equilibrium barrier. In ICS ’11: Proceedings of the 2nd Innovations in Computer Science Conference , pp. 125–140, 2011. [41] Krishna, V. and Sjöström, T. On the convergence of fictitious play. Mathematics of Operations Research ,23(2):479–511, 1998. [42] Kwon, J. and Mertikopoulos, P. A continuous-time approach to online optimization. Journal of Dynamics and Games , 4(2):125–148, April 2017. [43] Laraki, R. and Mertikopoulos, P. Higher order game dynamics. Journal of Economic Theory , 148(6): 2666–2695, November 2013. [44] Legacci, D., Mertikopoulos, P., Papadimitriou, C. H., Piliouras, G., and Pradelski, B. S. R. No-regret learning in harmonic games: Extrapolation in the presence of conflicting interests. In NeurIPS ’24: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [45] Legacci, D., Mertikopoulos, P., and Pradelski, B. S. R. A geometric decomposition of finite games: Con-vergence vs. recurrence under exponential weights. In ICML ’24: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [46] Lotidis, K., Giannou, A., Mertikopoulos, P., and Bambos, N. Accelerated regularized learning in finite N -person games. In NeurIPS ’24: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. THE ROLE OF PREFERENCES IN MULTI-AGENT ONLINE LEARNING 55 

[47] Lotidis, K., Mertikopoulos, P., Bambos, N., and Blanchet, J. H. Robust equilibria in continuous games: From strategic to dynamic robustness. In NeurIPS ’25: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [48] Maschler, M., Solan, E., and Zamir, S. Game Theory . Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2020. [49] McMahan, H. B., Holt, G., Sculley, D., Young, M., Ebner, D., Grady, J., Nie, L., Phillips, T., Davydov, E., Golovin, D., Chikkerur, S., Liu, D., Wattenberg, M., Hrafnkelsson, A. M., Boulos, T., and Kubica, J. Ad click prediction: a view from the trenches. In KDD ’13: Proceedings of the 19th International ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pp. 1222–1230, 2013. [50] Mertikopoulos, P. The attractors of regularized learning in games: Some answers, more questions. In 

Contributions to online algorithms, learning and games: Conference in honor of Elias Koutsoupias ,2023. [51] Mertikopoulos, P. Regret, equilibrium, and learning in games: A guided tour. In Sorin, S. and von Stengel, B. (eds.), Equilibria in Games: Existence, Selection, and Dynamics . Cambridge University Press, 2026. [52] Mertikopoulos, P. and Moustakas, A. L. The emergence of rational behavior in the presence of stochastic perturbations. The Annals of Applied Probability , 20(4):1359–1388, July 2010. [53] Mertikopoulos, P. and Sandholm, W. H. Learning in games via reinforcement and regularization. 

Mathematics of Operations Research , 41(4):1297–1324, November 2016. [54] Mertikopoulos, P. and Sandholm, W. H. Riemannian game dynamics. Journal of Economic Theory ,177:315–364, September 2018. [55] Mertikopoulos, P. and Zhou, Z. Learning in games with continuous action sets and unknown payoff functions. Mathematical Programming , 173(1-2):465–507, January 2019. [56] Mertikopoulos, P., Papadimitriou, C. H., and Piliouras, G. Cycles in adversarial regularized learning. In SODA ’18: Proceedings of the 29th annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , 2018. [57] Mertikopoulos, P., Hsieh, Y.-P., and Cevher, V. A unified stochastic approximation framework for learning in games. Mathematical Programming , 203:559–609, January 2024. [58] Milionis, J., Papadimitriou, C. H., Piliouras, G., and Spendlove, K. An impossibility theorem in game dynamics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA , 120(41):e2305349120, 2023. [59] Monderer, D. and Shapley, L. S. Potential games. Games and Economic Behavior , 14(1):124 – 143, 1996. [60] Nagarajan, S. G., Balduzzi, D., and Piliouras, G. From chaos to order: Symmetry and conservation laws in game dynamics. In ICML ’20: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , 2020. [61] Nisan, N., Roughgarden, T., Tardos, É., and Vazirani, V. V. (eds.). Algorithmic Game Theory .Cambridge University Press, 2007. [62] Omidshafiei, S., Papadimitriou, C. H., Piliouras, G., Tuyls, K., Rowland, M., Lespiau, J.-B., Czarnecki, W. M., Lanctot, M., Perolat, J., and Munos, R. α-Rank: Multi-agent evaluation by evolution. Scientific Reports , 9:9937, 2019. [63] Osborne, M. J. An Introduction to Game Theory . Oxford University Press, 2004. [64] Papadimitriou, C. H. and Piliouras, G. Game dynamics as the meaning of a game. SIGecom Exchanges ,16(2):53–63, 2019. [65] Piliouras, G. and Shamma, J. S. Optimization despite chaos: Convex relaxations to complex limit sets via Poincaré recurrence. In SODA ’14: Proceedings of the 25th annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , 2014. [66] Ritzberger, K. and Weibull, J. W. Evolutionary selection in normal-form games. Econometrica , 63(6): 1371–99, November 1995. [67] Sandholm, W. H. Population Games and Evolutionary Dynamics . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2010. [68] Shalev-Shwartz, S. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 4(2):107–194, 2011. [69] Shalev-Shwartz, S. and Singer, Y. Convex repeated games and Fenchel duality. In NIPS’ 06: Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1265–1272. MIT Press, 2006. [70] Shapley, L. S. Some topics in two-person games. In Advances in Game Theory , number 52 in Annals of Mathematics Studies. Princeton University Press, 1964. 56 O. ABBADI, R. LARAKI, AND P. MERTIKOPOULOS 

[71] Sorin, S. Exponential weight algorithm in continuous time. Mathematical Programming , 116(1):513–528, 2009. [72] Tarjan, R. E. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing , 1(2): 146–160, 1972. [73] Taylor, P. D. and Jonker, L. B. Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Mathematical Biosciences , 40(1-2):145–156, 1978. [74] Young, H. P. The evolution of conventions. Econometrica , 61(1):57–84, 1993.