Title: Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with  State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=TCsdlqzZNL

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Andreas Kontogiannis * 1 2 Konstantinos Papathanasiou * 3 Yi Shen 4

Giorgos Stamou 1 Michael M. Zavlanos 4 George Vouros 5

# Abstract 

Learning to cooperate in distributed partially ob-servable environments with no communication abilities poses significant challenges for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (MARL). This paper addresses key concerns in this domain, fo-cusing on inferring state representations from in-dividual agent observations and leveraging these representations to enhance agentsŌĆÖ exploration and collaborative task execution policies. To this end, we propose a novel state modelling frame-work for cooperative MARL, where agents in-fer meaningful belief representations of the non-observable state, with respect to optimizing their own policies, while filtering redundant and less in-formative joint state information. Building upon this framework, we propose the MARL SMPE 2 al-gorithm. In SMPE 2, agents enhance their own pol-icyŌĆÖs discriminative abilities under partial observ-ability, explicitly by incorporating their beliefs into the policy network, and implicitly by adopt-ing an adversarial type of exploration policies which encourages agents to discover novel, high-value states while improving the discriminative abilities of others. Experimentally, we show that SMPE 2 outperforms state-of-the-art MARL algo-rithms in complex fully cooperative tasks from the MPE, LBF, and RWARE benchmarks. 

# 1. Introduction 

Background and Motivation. In cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (MARL), the goal is to train the          

> *Equal contribution 1School of Electrical and Computer Engi-neering, NTUA, Greece 2Archimedes, Athena Research Center, Greece 3Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich 4Dept. of Me-chanical Engineering & Materials Science, Duke University 5Dept. of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, Greece. Correspondence to: Andreas Kontogiannis <andreaskontogiannis@mail.ntua.gr >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

learning agents in order to maximize their shared utility func-tion. Many real-world applications can be modeled as fully cooperative MARL problems, including multi-robot coop-eration (Alami et al., 1998), wireless network optimization (Lin et al., 2019), self-driving cars (Valiente et al., 2022), air traffic management (Kontogiannis & Vouros, 2023), and search & rescue (Rahman et al., 2022). In most real-world applications, agents, acting in a decentral-ized setting, have access to the environment state through mere observations. However, collaborating under partial observability is a challenging problem, inherent from the non-stationary nature of the multi-agent systems. To address this problem, different approaches have been proposed; e.g., approaches which aim agents to model other agents (e.g., in (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019)), to communicate effectively with others (e.g., in (Guan et al., 2022b)), or to leverage advanced replay memories (e.g., in (Yang et al., 2022)). This paper draws motivation from fully cooperative MARL real-world applications (Papadopoulos et al., 2025) and fo-cuses on the celebrated CTDE schema (Lowe et al., 2017a), where agents aim to learn effective collaborative policies. During training, agents share information about their ob-servations, but in execution time they must solve the task given only their own local information. Specifically, we are interested in settings where agents lack explicit com-munication channels during execution. Such settings are of particular interest, because, while communication-based methods leverage inexpensive simulators for training, they may incur substantial computational overhead when exe-cuted in real-world environments (Zhu et al., 2022; Zhang & Lesser, 2013). This paper aims agents to infer meaningful beliefs about the unobserved state and leverage them for enhanced cooperation with others. 

Agent modelling (AM) (Albrecht & Stone, 2017), also re-ferred to as opponent modelling (He et al., 2016; Foerster et al., 2018a), has been proposed as a solution to infer be-liefs about the global state, or the joint policy, under partial observability. Applications of AM in MARL have been extensively explored (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Raileanu et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2024; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2023; Tan & Chen, 2023; Gupta & Kahou, 1Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

2023; Fu et al., 2022), aiming agents to infer belief repre-sentations about other agentsŌĆÖ policies or the unobserved state. Nonetheless, current AM approaches may pose chal-lenges in enhancing agentsŌĆÖ policies for the following rea-sons: (a) Standard AM may infer belief representations that are suboptimal for enhancing the agentsŌĆÖ policies, because these representations are not learnt w.r.t. maximizing the agentŌĆÖs value function (e.g., in (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Pa-poudakis & Albrecht, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2023; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2022)). (b) Standard AM does not account for redundant, less informative, joint state fea-tures in learning the agentŌĆÖs beliefs (e.g., in (Raileanu et al., 2018; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Papoudakis et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023; Tan & Chen, 2023)), which has been shown to harm performance (Guan et al., 2022b). (c) AM representations are not leveraged in MARL to improve the agentsŌĆÖ initial random exploration policies, thus being inef-fective for enhancing policies in sparse-reward settings (as we show in Section 4.4). Moreover, AM approaches may be impractical because they typically involve a single learnable controller (e.g., in (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2022)), or make strong assumptions regard-ing: the observation feature space; e.g., assuming a priori knowledge about what the observation features represent (Nguyen et al., 2023; Tan & Chen, 2023)), the nature of the game (e.g., being applicable only to team-game settings (Sun et al., 2024)), or settings where agents observe other agentsŌĆÖ actions (Hu & Foerster, 2019; Hu et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022) in execution time. Taking the above significant challenges into account, this paper addresses the following research questions: 

Q1: Can agents learn to infer informative (latent) state representations given their own observations, in order to enhance their own policies towards coordination? 

Q2: Can agents leverage the inferred state representations to efficiently explore the state space and discover even better policies? 

High-level Intuition. To understand the high-level intu-ition guiding our approach, imagine a fully cooperative task from the well-known LBF benchmark, where agents must first engage in extensive joint exploration to identify a specific food target. Once identified, all agents must then execute coordinated joint actions, simultaneously consum-ing the target. At each time step, each agentŌĆö based on its current local information ŌĆöattempts to infer unobserved yet informative state information (e.g., the food targetŌĆÖs location and the positions of other agents with whom it must cooper-ate). The agent then refines its policy using informative state inferences accumulated throughout the entire trajectory . To enhance joint exploration , each agent is further incentivized to implicitly discover novel observations, thereby improving the state inference capabilities of other agents and ultimately facilitating better cooperation. 

Main Contributions. (a) We propose a novel state mod-elling framework for cooperative MARL under partial observability. In this framework, agents are trained to infer meaningful state belief representations of the non-observable joint state w.r.t. optimizing their own policies. The framework assumes that the joint state information can be redundant and needs to be appropriately filtered in order to be informative to agents. Also, the framework entails multi-agent learning and does not impose assumptions on either what the observation features represent, or access to other agentsŌĆÖ information during execution. (b) Building upon the state modelling framework, we propose ŌĆ£ State 

Modelling for Policy Enhancement through ExplorationŌĆØ 1

(SMPE 2), a MARL method which aims to enhance agentsŌĆÖ individual policiesŌĆÖ discriminative abilities under partial ob-servability. This is done explicitly by incorporating their beliefs into the policy networks, and implicitly by adopting adversarial exploration policies aiming to discover novel, high-value states while improving the discriminative abil-ities of others. More specifically, SMPE 2 leverages (i) 

variational inference for inferring meaningful state beliefs, combined with self-supervised learning for filtering non-informative joint state information, and (ii) intrinsic rewards to encourage adversarial exploration . (c) Experimentally, we show that SMPE 2 significantly outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) MARL algorithms in complex fully coopera-tive tasks of the Multiagent Particle Environment (MPE) (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018; Lowe et al., 2017b), Level-Based Foraging (LBF) (Albrecht & Stone, 2017) and the Multi-Robot Warehouse (RWARE) (Papoudakis et al., 2020) benchmarks, several tasks of which have been highlighted as open challenges by prior work (Papadopoulos et al., 2025). 

# 2. Preliminaries 

2.1. Cooperative MARL as a Dec-POMDP 

A Dec-POMDP (Oliehoek et al., 2016) for an N -agent cooperative task is a tuple (S, A, P, r, F, O, N, ╬│ ), where 

S is the state space, A is the joint action space A =

A1 ├Ś ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ├Ś AN , where Ai is the action space of agent 

i, P (sŌĆ▓ | s, a ) : S ├Ś A ŌåÆ [0 , 1] is the state transition function, r(s, a ) : S ├Ś A ŌåÆ R is the reward function and 

╬│ Ōłł [0 , 1) is the discount factor. Assuming partial observ-ability, each agent at time step t does not have access to the full state, yet it samples observations oit Ōłł Oi accord-ing to the observation function Fi(s) : S ŌåÆ Oi. AgentsŌĆÖ joint observations are denoted by o Ōłł O and are sampled according to F = Q 

> i

Fi. The action-observation history        

> 1Our official source code can be found at https://github.com/ddaedalus/smpe.

2Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Figure 1. Overview of SMPE 2: SMPE 2 is built on top of the MAA2C algorithm (Papoudakis et al., 2020). Each agentŌĆÖs actor ( blue box )has partial observability. Conditioned on agentŌĆÖ own observation oi, it reconstructs other agentsŌĆÖ observations oŌłÆi using a variational encoder-decoder (ED) which infers a belief state embedding zi. To filter non-informative joint state information and learn only from informative features, the actor utilizes agent modelling (AM) filters ( wi) which filter the reconstruction targets of ED in a self-supervised learning manner. Moreover, the embeddings zi are exploited to provide intrinsic rewards ╦åri, in order to facilitate the proposed adversarial exploration schema. Finally, the actor exploits the belief embeddings zi to enhance the policy ŽĆŽł (ait | hit, z it ). Concurrently, SMPE 2

leverages two critic models ( red box ), namely V╬Š (s) and Vk (╦å s) (parameterized by ╬Š and k accordingly), both accessing full observability. 

V╬Š is the standard critic of backbone MAA2C and Vk (╦å s) approximates explicitly the joint value function at modified states ╦ås purified by the AM filters wi. During execution agents do not have access to othersŌĆÖ observations, but use the inferred zi to discriminate effectively between different states despite partial observability. The full algorithm of SMPE 2 can be found in Algorithm 1 (Appendix). 

for agent i at time t is denoted by hit Ōłł Hi, which in-cludes action-observation pairs until t-1 and oit, on which the agent can condition its individual stochastic policy 

ŽĆi╬Ėi (ait | hit) : Hi ├Ś Ai ŌåÆ [0 , 1] , parameterised by ╬Ėi.The joint action of all agents other than i is denoted by aŌłÆi,and we use a similar convention for the policies, i.e., ŽĆŌłÆi╬Ė .The joint policy is denoted by ŽĆ╬Ė , with parameters ╬Ė Ōłł ╬ś .The objective is to find an optimal joint policy which satisfies the optimal value function V ŌłŚ =max ╬Ė EaŌł╝ŽĆ╬Ė ,s ŌĆ▓Ōł╝P (┬Ę| s,a ),o Ōł╝F (s) [PŌł× 

> t=0

╬│trt].

2.2. The state modelling optimization framework 

The main idea behind the proposed state modelling (SM) optimization framework is to allow agents, conditioned only on their own observations , to infer meaningful beliefs of the unobserved state which would help them optimize their individual policies. Our state modelling framework connects state-representation learning with policy optimization. Formally, we consider that each agent i aims to learn a model of the non-observable joint state: The model infers a probability distribution over beliefs regarding the non-observable joint state, based on agentsŌĆÖ local observations. The model is parameterized by Žēi and is denoted by pŽēi .State modelling assumes a belief space Zi of latent vari-ables zi, such that zi Ōł╝ pŽēi (┬Ę | oi) contains meaningful information about the unobserved state, informative for opti-mizing the agentŌĆÖs own policy. In particular, we assume that states contain information redundant for optimising agentsŌĆÖ individual policies. Specifically, we consider a joint state feature to be non-informative for agent i if: ŌĆó it is irrelevant to agent i for maximizing its future rewards (if assuming that the agent had access to it) ŌĆó it cannot be inferred through zi, in the sense that the agent cannot predict it conditioned on its own observa-tion due to partial observability and non-stationarity. Considering the above assumptions, the state modelling objective is to find meaningful latent beliefs zi with respect to optimizing the joint policy ŽĆŽł , resulting from individual policies ŽĆŽłi parameterized by Žłi, i.e. ŽĆŽłi (ait | hit, z it ) : 

Hi ├Ś Z i ├Ś Ai ŌåÆ [0 , 1] , as follows: 

V ŌłŚ 

> SM

= max  

> Žē

max  

> Žł

VSM (Žē, Žł )= max  

> Žē,Žł

EzŌł╝pŽē

"

EaŌł╝ŽĆŽł ,s ŌĆ▓Ōł╝P (┬Ę| s,a ),o Ōł╝F (s)

" Ōł×X

> t=0

╬│trt

## 

(1) 3Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

where V ŌłŚ 

> SM

is the optimal value function under SM. 

Proposition 2.1. The state modelling objective equals the DecPOMDP objective; i.e. V ŌłŚ 

> SM

= V ŌłŚ.

Although both objectives are intractable, Proposition 2.1 implies that VSM allows us to explore how agents can form meaningful beliefs zi about the unobserved states with suffi-cient state-discriminating abilities to enhance their own poli-cies without constraining the candidate policies, i.e. those that utilize zi, to be suboptimal w.r.t. the value function. 

# 3. State Modelling for Policy Enhancement through Exploration (SMPE 2)

We propose a state modelling MARL method, called SMPE 2. The method can be separated into two distinct, but concurrent, parts. The first part (Section 3.1) involves self-supervised state modelling, where each agent learns a model to infer meaningful belief state representations based on own and other agentsŌĆÖ observations. The second part (Section 3.2) involves the explicit use of the inferred repre-sentations to encourage agents towards an adversarial type of multi-agent exploration through intrinsic motivation. The learning process of SMPE 2 is illustrated in Figure 1. 

3.1. Self-supervised state modelling 

To learn a representation of the unobserved state, we aim agents to learn the reconstruction of informative features of other agentsŌĆÖ observations using only their own observa-tions. The reconstruction aims at inferring latent beliefs, zi,about the unobserved state, assuming that joint observations provide sufficient evidence to discriminate between states. SMPE 2 uses amortized variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2013), i.e., the reconstruction model of agent i is a probabilistic encoder ( qŽēi )-decoder ( pŽĢi ) (ED). One would assume that ideally ED should perfectly predict ( ╦åoŌłÆi) other agentsŌĆÖ observations ( oŌłÆi), so that zi could be as informative about what other agents observe as possible. However, as it was highlighted in prior work (Guan et al., 2022b), using the full state information as an extra input to the policy, even when utilizing a compressed embedding, may harm perfor-mance due to redundant state information non-informative to agent i.To mitigate the use of redundant state information, SMPE 2

filters out non-informative features of oŌłÆi, i.e., state fea-tures that are irrelevant to agent i for maximizing its future rewards and cannot be inferred through zi. To achieve this, we introduce agent modeling (AM) filters , denoted by wij ,which serve as learnable weight parametersŌĆöone for each of the other agents j Ōłł ŌłÆ i. SMPE 2 utilizes wij = Žā(ŽĢwi (oj )) ,where ŽĢwi is parameterized by an MLP, and Žā is the sigmoid activation function, ensuring that the filter values satisfy 

wij Ōłł [0 , 1] . Intuitively, wi has an AM interpretation, as it represents the importance of each of other agentsŌĆÖ informa-tion to agent iŌĆÖs state modelling. Formally, for each agent i, SMPE 2 considers a modification of the state modelling framework of (1) to the following maximization problem: maximize 

> Žēi,ŽĢ i,Žł i

VSM (Žē, Žł )+ ╬╗┬ĘELBO (Žēi, ŽĢ i ;oi, w i ┬ĘoŌłÆi) (2) where ┬Ę (in wi ┬Ę oŌłÆi) denotes element-wise multiplication and we define ELBO (Žēi, ŽĢ i ; oi, w i ┬Ę oŌłÆi) to be equal to 

EziŌł╝qŽēi

log pŽĢi (wi ┬Ę oŌłÆi | zi)ŌłÆKL  qŽēi (zi | oi) Ōłź p(zi)

that is, the Evidence Lower bound (Kingma & Welling, 2013) which uses oŌłÆi filtered by wi as the reconstruction targets. Although problem (2) is also intractable, the ELBO term would allow SMPE 2 to find good solutions: ED aims to identify informative observation features in the reconstruc-tion, through the AM filters, leading to zi which enhance the individual agentsŌĆÖ policies towards cooperation. In do-ing so, SMPE 2 entails enhanced performance of the joint policy by finding state beliefs zi w.r.t maximizing the value function . This comes in contrast to other approaches (e.g., (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Papoudakis & Albrecht, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2023; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2022)) which may suffer from distribution mismatch (Ma et al.), as zi is disconnected from the policy. We note that 

╬╗ in (2) is a hyperparameter ensuring that the ELBO term does not dominate the state modelling objective VSM .Based on (2) , in the reconstruction part of SMPE 2, ED has as prediction target the other agentsŌĆÖ observations, oŌłÆit fil-tered by wi. More specifically, the ED per agent i minimizes the following self-supervised reconstruction loss (using the reparameterization trick (Kingma & Welling, 2013), with 

Žēi being Gaussian): 

Lrec (Žēi, ŽĢ i, ŽĢ wi ) = Ōłź ewi ┬Ę oŌłÆi ŌłÆ wi ┬Ę ╦åoŌłÆiŌłź2 (3) where we use targets ewi to filter the target observations oŌłÆi

in order to stabilize the training of wi.Both ( Žēi, ŽĢ i) and wi are learned in a self-supervised manner, since the targets in Equation (3) are explicitly factorized by the AM filters. Note the importance of the AM filters 

wi: (a) With it, although the target of ED grows linearly with the number of agents, only features that can be inferred through zi remain as part of other agentsŌĆÖ observations in the reconstruction loss. (b) Without it, it would be challenging to infer meaningful embeddings zi, due to non-informative joint state information. Thus, wi explicitly controls the reconstruction of the initial other agentsŌĆÖ observations, since it adjusts how much ED would penalize the loss for each target feature. 4Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

However, if both wi and ╦£wi are equal to 0, then these assign-ments are solutions to (3) . To ensure that wi does not vanish to zero throughout all dimensions, we add the following regularization loss: 

Lnorm (ŽĢwi ) = ŌłÆŌłź wiŌłź22 (4) To make the embeddings zi variational (and thus probabilis-tic as in the definition of state modelling), following the problem in (2) , we add the standard KL divergence regular-ization term, as follows: 

LKL (Žēi) = KL  qŽēi (zi|oi) Ōłź p(zi), p(zi) = N(0 , I )

(5) As for the policy optimization part, SMPE 2 can be imple-mented using any actor-critic MARL algorithm. We imple-ment SMPE 2 using MAA2C (see Appendix C.1), due to its good performance on various benchmarks (Papoudakis et al., 2020; Papadopoulos et al., 2025) and its efficient natural on-policy learning. Following the definition of the state modelling problem, we aim to ensure that wi (and thus 

zi) incorporate information relevant to maximizing V ŽĆ and thus, wi to be capable of filtering non-informative state fea-tures irrelevant to maximizing agentŌĆÖs future rewards. To do so, alongside MAA2CŌĆÖs standard critic (parameterized by 

╬Š), we train an additional critic (parameterized by k) which exploits wi. Thus, we minimize the following losses: 

Lcritic (╬Š) = 

h

rit + V ŽĆ╬ŠŌĆ▓ (st+1 ) ŌłÆ V ŽĆ╬Š (st)

i2

Lw

> critic

(ŽĢwi , k ) = rit + V ŽĆkŌĆ▓ (╦å st+1 ) ŌłÆ V ŽĆk ( ╦å st)2 (6) where ╦ås = oi ŌŖĢ(wi ┬ĘoŌłÆi) is the filtered state from the view of agent iŌĆÖs modelling, with ŌŖĢ meaning vector concatenation, and superscript for target network. Overall, the loss for learning the state belief representations for agent i is: 

Lencodings = Lw 

> critic

+╬╗rec ┬ĘLrec +╬╗norm ┬ĘLnorm +╬╗KL ┬ĘLKL (7) where ╬╗rec , ╬╗norm and ╬╗KL are hyperparameters weighting the corresponding loss terms. The actor of each agent i uses policy ŽĆ ŌēĪ ŽĆŽłi enhanced by zi. Thus, the actor loss is: 

Lactor (Žłi) = ŌłÆ╬▓H ┬Ę H  ŽĆŽłi (ait | hit, z it )

ŌłÆ log ŽĆŽłi (ait | hit, z it ) ┬Ę



rit + V ŽĆ╬ŠŌĆ▓ (st+1 ) ŌłÆ V ŽĆ╬Š (st)



Therefore, the overall SMPE loss is as follows: 

LSMPE = Lactor + Lcritic + Lencodings .

3.2. Adversarial Count-based Intrinsic Exploration 

We further empower the agentsŌĆÖ policies to reach novel, high-value states, even in sparse-reward settings. To do so, we harness the rich state information captured by the be-lief zi and design intrinsic rewards which naturally account for both individual and collective benefit. Specifically, our exploration strategy encourages each agent i to effectively explore its own belief space so that it discovers novel zi. To do so, given that zi is solely conditioned on oi, the agent is implicitly motivated to discover novel observations that must lead to novel zi. Crucially, our exploration schema implies an adversarial exploration framework fostering co-operation: Agent i is intrinsically motivated to discover novel oi (which lead to novel zi) which at the same time constitute unseen ED prediction targets for the othersŌĆÖ re-construction training. Therefore, these targets aim to adver-sarially increase the losses of other agentsŌĆÖ reconstruction models. By doing do, agent i, except only for searching for novel oi, implicitly strives to assign adversarial targets to other agents ŌłÆi, to help them form better beliefs about the global state. In the same way, since zi is informative of both 

oi and oŌłÆi, agent i, leveraging oŌłÆi, is also urged to form a well-explored belief about what others observe, enhancing cooperation. To leverage the above benefits, we adopt a simple count-based intrinsic reward schema based on the SimHash algo-rithm, similar to (Tang et al., 2017), but instead of hashing the agentŌĆÖs observations, we hash zi Ōłł Z . Specifically, we utilize the SimHash function SH : Z ŌåÆ Z and calculate the intrinsic reward ╦åri as follows: ╦åri = 1 /pn(SH (zi)) , where 

n(SH (zi)) represents the counts of SH (zi) for agent i.Agent i uses the modified reward ╦£rit = ( rit + ╬▓╦årit), where hyperparameter ╬▓ controls the contribution of the intrinsic reward. The choice of SH is due to the fact that it allows nearby zi to be transformed into nearby hash values at low computational cost. A key note here is that the domain of the SH function is dynamic. To make intrinsic rewards more stable and ensure the assumption of i.i.d. training data, zi becomes more stable by avoiding large changes in the ED parameters between successive training episodes. To do so, similarly to (Papoudakis et al., 2021), we perform periodic hard updates of Žēi and ŽĢi using a fixed number of training steps as an update period. 

Remark 3.1 . For the interested reader, we demonstrate in Appendix E.4.7 that the intrinsic rewards do not fluctuate; instead, they decrease smoothly throughout training until they reach a minimal plateau, as expected. 

Why is ED conditioned only on oi? We choose ED to be conditioned solely on oi, instead of hi. In particular, since 

zi is leveraged for intrinsic exploration, we make zi solely conditioned on oi, so that the agent will be intrinsically re-warded more if the current observation was novel and led to novel zi. On the other hand, if ED was indeed condi-tioned on hi, then the intrinsic exploration would be less meaningful, since the main goal now would be to discover 

novel trajectories instead of novel observations (that lead to 5Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

novel zi), thus making the novelty of the current observation 

excessively compressed within zi. For instance, if the agent discovered a novel, high-value observation (thus contained in a high-value global state) within a well-explored trajec-tory, then the intrinsic reward would be quite low (because the whole trajectory would not be novel) and thus possibly unable to help the agent find a better policy. The above conceptual motivation does not defeat the assumption of partial observability, because the policy network is indeed conditioned on hit and therefore implicitly leverages a be-lief representation conditioned on all time steps, that is all per-time-step beliefs zit .

# 4. Experimental Setup 

In our experimental setup, we evaluate MARL algorithms on three widely recognized benchmarks: MPE (Mordatch & Abbeel, 2018; Lowe et al., 2017b), LBF (Albrecht & Stone, 2017), and RWARE (Papoudakis et al., 2020). Due to space constraints, technical details for these benchmarks can be found in Appendices E.1, E.2, and E.3, respectively. These benchmarks often require substantial coordination and ex-ploration capabilities in order to discover effective joint policies and have been used to evaluate MARL algorithms in many related works, including (Papadopoulos et al., 2025; Christianos et al., 2021; Papoudakis et al., 2021; Guan et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2022; Papoudakis et al., 2020). Regarding the questions stated in the introduction, to address 

Q1 , we first verify the effectiveness of the inferred state modelling embeddings of the proposed method on fully cooperative dense-reward tasks of the MPE benchmark. To this aim, in MPE we evaluate our method without using the proposed intrinsic rewarding schema. To answer Q2 , we evaluate the effectiveness of full SMPE 2 on complex, fully cooperative, sparse-reward tasks of the LBF and RWARE benchmarks. In MPE we compare our method with MAA2C, COMA (Foerster et al., 2018b), MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022) and the transformer-based ATM (Yang et al., 2022). In LBF and RWARE, we also include the SOTA intrinsic motivation based methods: EOI (Jiang & Lu, 2021), EMC (Zheng et al., 2021) and MASER (Jeon et al., 2022), as they cover a wide range of different approaches for exploration in MARL; namely through diversity, curiosity and sub-goal generation, respectively. Results are averaged over six random seeds, and the primary metric is the unnormalized average episodic reward. We report 25-75% confidence intervals (as in (Zheng et al., 2021)). Following (Papoudakis et al., 2020), we set the total number of steps to 10M for MPE and LBF, and 40M for RWARE. 

4.1. Results on the MPE benchmark 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed method without intrinsic rewards for exploration (SMPE) on two fully co-operative MPE tasks: Spread and Double Speaker-Listener .To assess scalability, we examine four scenarios with 3, 4, 5, and 8 agents in the Spread task, following a setup similar to (Ruan et al., 2022). Due to space limitations, results for Double Speaker-Listener are provided in Appendix B. As depicted in Figure 2, SMPE demonstrates superior per-formance in Spread , showing significant improvements in overall performance. Notably, as the number of agents and landmarks increases, SMPE consistently outperforms other methods by enabling agents to form informative beliefs about the unobserved state. This allows agents to maintain awareness of available landmarks even with increased com-plexity, a capability not easily achieved by other methods. 

4.2. Results on the LBF benchmark 

In this section, we evaluate the full SMPE 2 on six fully cooperative LBF tasks. As Figure 3 shows, SMPE 2 achieves superior performance compared to the other SOTA methods. In contrast to the other methods, SMPE 2 manages to fully solve challenging sparse-reward LBF tasks, including 2s-9x9-3p-2f and 4s-11x11-3p-2f , both of which have been highlighted as open challenges by prior work (Papadopoulos et al., 2025). As for the other LBF tasks, SMPE 2 either converges faster (a) to an optimal policy, or (b) to a good policy, or constantly achieves better episodic reward over time, even with a large grid (see 7s-20x20-5p-3f ). SMPE 2ŌĆÖs success stems from its alignment with LBFŌĆÖs need for precise coordination among agents (through accurate beliefs about the unobserved state and good exploration policies) to collect all foods optimally. On the other hand, EMC and MASER completely fail to improve the well-known poor performance of QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020) in LBF (e.g., see (Papadopoulos et al., 2025; Papoudakis et al., 2020)), because both methods highly rely on the initial random policies and, as a result, they generate misleading intrinsic rewards based on low-value episodic data or irrele-vant sub-goals, respectively. The only exception on this is the 2s-12x12-2p-2f task, only because this task is the least sparse and finding a good, non-optimal policy is not that hard. EOI, which is built on top of MAA2C, does not per-form as well as MAA2C, because it encourages the agents to explore through diversity, which may be unnecessary to the homogeneous agents in LBF. 

4.3. Results on the RWARE benchmark 

We evaluate SMPE 2 on three hard, fully cooperative RWARE tasks; namely tiny-2ag-hard , tiny-4ag-hard and 

small-4ag-hard . As shown in Figure 4, our SMPE 2 achieves 6Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration   

> Figure 2. Results on the MPE benchmark
> Figure 3. Results on the LBF benchmark

superior performance compared to the SOTA methods across all three tasks. These RWARE tasks are particularly challenging because they require: (1) effective exploration strategies to deal with sparse rewards; that is only very spe-cific sequences of actions result to positive rewards (first load a specific shelf and then unload into an empty shelf), (2) agents to coordinate so that they avoid monopolizing all tasks individually or adopting policies that obstruct others, particularly in narrow passages, and (3) accurate modelling of the state due to excessive partial observability. The failure of MASER and EMC is attributed to the first of the reasons. EOI displays good performance because it encourages the agents to be more diverse, thus some of them are able to find good policies. However, due to the second reason it completely fails in small-4ag-hard , because of insufficient coordination among agents. In contrast, SMPE 2

outperforms the SOTA methods, as: It addresses the third reason through modelling explicitly the joint state and also the first and second reasons through the effectiveness of the adversarial exploration schema. 

4.4. Ablation Study 

In our ablation study, we address the following questions: 

Q3: How important are state modelling, the AM filters and the adversarial exploration schema? 

Q4: How expressive is the state modelling embedding zi?

Q5: Does SMPE 2 outperform other modelling methods? 

Q6: Is SMPE 2 flexible? Can it be combined with other MARL backbone algorithms? (see Appendix E.4.9) 

Q7: Do we really need a second critic for training wi w.r.t. policy optimization? (See Appendix E.4.3) First, we address question Q3 . Figure 5 validates the com-ponent selection in SMPE 2. It depicts (up) the importance of the AM filters ( wi) in better episodic reward and con-vergence to good policies and also the superiority of the proposed adversarial exploration schema over the standard method (Tang et al., 2017). Here, we note that the complete failure of SMPE (no intr) is attributed to the fact that al-though agents are empowered by state modelling abilities, it may be difficult to adopt good exploration policies and thus to reach high-value states. Figure 5 (up) highlights that both excessive cooperation and good exploration are required to achieve good performance, as the baseline SMPE meth-ods do not perform well. Thus, in these tasks, we would not have good exploration without good state modelling for effective collaboration, neither good collaboration without good exploration. Moreover, Figure 5 (down) demonstrates 7Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration                

> Figure 4. Results on the RWARE benchmark
> Figure 5. Ablation study: (up) Validating component selection: SMPE 2without intrinsic rewards ( no intr ), AM filters ( no filters ), LKL
> (no kl ), Lnorm (no L2 norm ), and with standard SimHash (Tang et al., 2017) replacing our exploration schema ( obs rew ). (down) Learning
> wi(and thus zi) w.r.t. policy optimization: we use SMPE 2without Lw
> critic (no critic w ) as baseline.

the impact of learning state representations w.r.t. policy op-timization (as proposed in (1) ), which can yield significant improvements in episodic reward and policy convergence. To address Q4 , in Figure 7, we present t-SNE representa-tions (commonly used in MARL as in (Papoudakis et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024)) of the state mod-elling beliefs zi of the three agents in LBF 2s-11x11-3p-2f 

task. The figure demonstrates that when LKL is enabled, agents form cohesive beliefs: Their beliefs coincide in re-gions covering a large area, while maintaining individual beliefs in regions covering a smaller area. Conversely, with-out LKL , agentsŌĆÖ beliefs show less coherence, resulting in poorer joint exploration, as depicted in Figure 5. Table 1 (Appendix E.4.8) further validates these findings. To address question Q5 , we compare SMPE 2 to SIDE (Xu et al., 2022) and a multi-agent extension of the popular AM method LIAM (Papoudakis et al., 2021) (denoted by MLIAM). More details about MLIAM can be found in Ap-pendix C.2. Figure 6 illustrates the comparison in MPE and LBF tasks (benchmarks where LIAM was also originally tested). SMPE 2 significantly outperforms the baselines due to the following reasons: (a) MLIAMŌĆÖs objective is exac-erbated by modelling the actions of others, leading to an inference problem with an exponentially large number of candidate target actions, (b) SIDE does not use the inferred 

zi in execution, (c) both methods do not account for non-informative state information, and (d) both methods do not leverage the inferred representations to improve joint explo-ration. 

MARL and Attention Modules. MARL approaches (e.g., (Sunehag et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2020; Son et al., 2019)) represent the joint state-action value as a function of indi-vidual models learnt based on the global reward. Atten-tion modules (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been proposed: to encourage the cooperation of agents via agent-centric mechanisms (Shang et al., 2021), to estimate the value func-tions for explorative interaction among the agents (Ma et al., 2021), as advanced replay memories (Yang et al., 2022), 8Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration             

> Figure 6. SMPE 2against a custom implementation of the multi-agent extension of LIAM (Papoudakis et al., 2021) and SIDE (Xu et al., 2022)
> Figure 7. t-SNE visualization of the state modelling embedding zi(for the three agents; agent 1: red, agent 2: green, agent 3: blue) in an LBF task at the 45th time step; (left) : SMPE 2,(right) :SMPE 2(no kl) for ablation study with LKL = 0 .

for efficient credit assignment (Zhao et al., 2023b), and for learning good policies (Ma et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023a). 

Agent Modelling (AM). AM (Albrecht & Stone, 2017) has been proposed to model the policies of other agents or the unobserved state. Bayesian inference has been used to learn representations of probabilistic beliefs (Zintgraf et al., 2021; Moreno et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2023), or even for explic-itly modelling concepts derived from the theory of mind (Nguyen et al., 2020; Moreno et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021). LIAM (Papoudakis et al., 2021) uses an ED to learn em-beddings, by reconstructing the local information of other agents, and add them as extra input for policy learning. A key distinction between standard AM (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Papoudakis et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023) and our state modelling lies in their utilization: the former serves as an auxiliary task disconnected from policy opti-mization, while the latter does not necessitate an optimal full reconstruction, but only good reconstruction of the filtered targets to find good policies. Also, AM typically involves a single controller interacting with non-learnable agents (Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Papoudakis & Albrecht, 2020; Papoudakis et al., 2021; Nguyen et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2022), or makes strong assumptions regarding prior knowledge of observation features (Tan & Chen, 2023; Nguyen et al., 2023), access to other agentsŌĆÖ information during execution (Yuan et al., 2022; Hu & Foerster, 2019; Hu et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2022), or considers only team-game settings (Sun et al., 2024). Additionally, approaches such as (Raileanu et al., 2018; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2023; Tan & Chen, 2023; Xu et al., 2022) do not consider non-informative joint state information in learning beliefs, which can detrimentally affect performance (Guan et al., 2022b). 

# 5. Conclusion and Future Directions 

In this paper, we studied the problem of inferring infor-mative state representations under partial observability and using them for better exploration in cooperative MARL. We proposed a state modelling optimization framework, on top of which we proposed a novel MARL method, namely SMPE 2. Experimentally, we demonstrated that SMPE 2 out-performs state-of-the-art methods in complex MPE, LBF and RWARE tasks. In future work, we are interested in the following open challenges: (a) Can we further improve state modelling by incorporating transformers into the architecture? (b) How can we use state modelling to improve scalability in MARL? (c) Does state modelling adapt well in stochastic settings (i.e. settings with noisy observations, or more complicated dynamics)? 9Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was supported in part by project MIS 5154714 of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan Greece 2.0 funded by the European Union under the NextGenerationEU Program. 

# Impact Statement 

Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MARL) holds promise for a wide array of applications spanning robotic warehouses, search&rescue, autonomous vehicles, software agents, and video games, among others. Partial observ-ability in these settings is an inherent feature as much as decentralization: This imposes challenges for the coordi-nation and cooperation of agents that this work addresses. Indeed, this paper contributes the state modelling frame-work and SMPE 2 algorithm to the advancement of MARL models for such applications, in large and continuous state-action spaces, close to real-world problems. However, it is essential to acknowledge that the practical implementation of MARL methods faces significant challenges, including issues of limited theoretical guarantees, poor generalization to unseen tasks, explainability, legal and ethical consider-ations. These challenges, although beyond the immediate scope of our work, underscore the necessity for prioritizing extensive research in MARL. The overarching objective is to develop MARL agents capable of operating safely and addressing real-world problems effectively. It is imperative that many MARL methods undergo rigorous testing before deployment. While the potential benefits of safe, accurate, and cost-effective MARL applications are substantial, in-cluding the reduction of human effort in demanding tasks and the enhancement of safety, achieving these outcomes requires meticulous validation and refinement of the under-lying methodologies. 

# References 

Alami, R., Fleury, S., Herrb, M., Ingrand, F., and Robert, F. Multi-robot cooperation in the martha project. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , 5(1):36ŌĆō47, 1998. Albrecht, S. V. and Stone, P. Reasoning about hypothetical agent behaviours and their parameters. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiA-gent Systems , pp. 547ŌĆō555, 2017. Christianos, F., Sch ┬©afer, L., and Albrecht, S. Shared experi-ence actor-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 33: 10707ŌĆō10717, 2020. Christianos, F., Papoudakis, G., Rahman, M. A., and Al-brecht, S. V. Scaling multi-agent reinforcement learning with selective parameter sharing. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pp. 1989ŌĆō1998. PMLR, 2021. Foerster, J., Chen, R. Y., Al-Shedivat, M., Whiteson, S., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 122ŌĆō130, 2018a. Foerster, J., Farquhar, G., Afouras, T., Nardelli, N., and Whiteson, S. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradi-ents. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018b. Fu, H., Tian, Y., Yu, H., Liu, W., Wu, S., Xiong, J., Wen, Y., Li, K., Xing, J., Fu, Q., et al. Greedy when sure and conservative when uncertain about the opponents. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 6829ŌĆō6848. PMLR, 2022. Guan, C., Chen, F., Yuan, L., Wang, C., Yin, H., Zhang, Z., and Yu, Y. Efficient multi-agent communication via self-supervised information aggregation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:1020ŌĆō1033, 2022a. Guan, C., Chen, F., Yuan, L., Wang, C., Yin, H., Zhang, Z., and Yu, Y. Efficient multi-agent communication via self-supervised information aggregation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:1020ŌĆō1033, 2022b. Gupta, N. and Kahou, S. E. Cammarl: Conformal action modeling in multi agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11128 , 2023. He, H., Boyd-Graber, J., Kwok, K., and Daum ┬┤e III, H. Opponent modeling in deep reinforcement learning. In 

International conference on machine learning , pp. 1804ŌĆō 1813. PMLR, 2016. Hernandez-Leal, P., Kartal, B., and Taylor, M. E. Agent modeling as auxiliary task for deep reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence and interactive digital entertainment , vol-ume 15, pp. 31ŌĆō37, 2019. Hu, H. and Foerster, J. N. Simplified action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Hu, H., Lerer, A., Cui, B., Pineda, L., Brown, N., and Foer-ster, J. Off-belief learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 4369ŌĆō4379. PMLR, 2021. Jeon, J., Kim, W., Jung, W., and Sung, Y. Maser: Multi-agent reinforcement learning with subgoals generated 10 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

from experience replay buffer. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 10041ŌĆō10052. PMLR, 2022. Jiang, J. and Lu, Z. The emergence of individuality. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 4992ŌĆō 5001. PMLR, 2021. Jo, Y., Lee, S., Yeom, J., and Han, S. Fox: Formation-aware exploration in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 38, pp. 12985ŌĆō12994, 2024. Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Kontogiannis, A. and Vouros, G. A. Inherently interpretable deep reinforcement learning through online mimicking. In International Workshop on Explainable, Transparent Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , pp. 160ŌĆō 179. Springer, 2023. Li, C., Wang, T., Wu, C., Zhao, Q., Yang, J., and Zhang, C. Celebrating diversity in shared multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3991ŌĆō4002, 2021. Li, J., Kuang, K., Wang, B., Li, X., Wu, F., Xiao, J., and Chen, L. Two heads are better than one: A simple explo-ration framework for efficient multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Lin, X., Tang, Y., Lei, X., Xia, J., Zhou, Q., Wu, H., and Fan, L. Marl-based distributed cache placement for wireless networks. IEEE Access , 7:62606ŌĆō62615, 2019. Liu, Z., Wan, L., Yang, X., Chen, Z., Chen, X., and Lan, X. Imagine, initialize, and explore: An effective explo-ration method in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 38, pp. 17487ŌĆō17495, 2024. Lowe, R., Wu, Y. I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Pieter Abbeel, O., and Mordatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 30, 2017a. Lowe, R., Wu, Y. I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Pieter Abbeel, O., and Mordatch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 30, 2017b. Ma, L., Wang, Y., Zhong, F., Zhu, S.-C., and Wang, Y. Fast peer adaptation with context-aware exploration. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Ma, M., Liu, J., Sokota, S., Kleiman-Weiner, M., and Foer-ster, J. N. Learning intuitive policies using action features. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 23358ŌĆō23372. PMLR, 2023. Ma, X., Yang, Y., Li, C., Lu, Y., Zhao, Q., and Yang, J. Modeling the interaction between agents in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 853ŌĆō861, 2021. Mahajan, A., Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., and Whiteson, S. Maven: Multi-agent variational exploration. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Asyn-chronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In 

International conference on machine learning , pp. 1928ŌĆō 1937. PMLR, 2016. Mordatch, I. and Abbeel, P. Emergence of grounded com-positional language in multi-agent populations. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 32, 2018. Moreno, P., Hughes, E., McKee, K. R., Pires, B. A., and Weber, T. Neural recursive belief states in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02274 ,2021. Nguyen, D., Venkatesh, S., Nguyen, P., and Tran, T. Theory of mind with guilt aversion facilitates cooperative rein-forcement learning. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 33ŌĆō48. PMLR, 2020. Nguyen, D., Le, H., Do, K., Venkatesh, S., and Tran, T. Social motivation for modelling other agents un-der partial observability in decentralised training. In Elkind, E. (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second In-ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-23 , pp. 4082ŌĆō4090. International Joint Confer-ences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2023. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2023/454. URL https://doi.org/ 10.24963/ijcai.2023/454 . Main Track. Oliehoek, F. A., Amato, C., et al. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs , volume 1. Springer, 2016. Papadopoulos, G., Kontogiannis, A., Papadopoulou, F., Pou-lianou, C., Koumentis, I., and Vouros, G. An extended benchmarking of multi-agent reinforcement learning algo-rithms in complex fully cooperative tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04773 , 2025. Papoudakis, G. and Albrecht, S. V. Variational autoencoders for opponent modeling in multi-agent systems. In AAAI 2020 Workshop on Reinforcement Learning in Games ,2020. 11 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Papoudakis, G., Christianos, F., Sch ┬©afer, L., and Albrecht, S. V. Benchmarking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07869 , 2020. Papoudakis, G., Christianos, F., and Albrecht, S. Agent mod-elling under partial observability for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:19210ŌĆō19222, 2021. Rahman, A., Bhattacharya, A., Ramachandran, T., Mukher-jee, S., Sharma, H., Fujimoto, T., and Chatterjee, S. Ad-versar: Adversarial search and rescue via multi-agent reinforcement learning. In 2022 IEEE International Sym-posium on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST) ,pp. 1ŌĆō7. IEEE, 2022. Raileanu, R., Denton, E., Szlam, A., and Fergus, R. Mod-eling others using oneself in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pp. 4257ŌĆō4266. PMLR, 2018. Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(1):7234ŌĆō 7284, 2020. Ruan, J., Du, Y., Xiong, X., Xing, D., Li, X., Meng, L., Zhang, H., Wang, J., and Xu, B. Gcs: Graph-based coor-dination strategy for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , pp. 1128ŌĆō 1136, 2022. Shang, W., Espeholt, L., Raichuk, A., and Salimans, T. Agent-centric representations for multi-agent reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09402 , 2021. Son, K., Kim, D., Kang, W. J., Hostallero, D. E., and Yi, Y. Qtran: Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Inter-national conference on machine learning , pp. 5887ŌĆō5896. PMLR, 2019. Su, J., Adams, S., and Beling, P. Value-decomposition multi-agent actor-critics. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 35, pp. 11352ŌĆō11360, 2021. Sun, J., Chen, S., Zhang, C., Ma, Y., and Zhang, J. Decision-making with speculative opponent models. IEEE Trans-actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2024. Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zam-baldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat, N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K., et al. Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning based on team reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 2085ŌĆō 2087, 2018. Tan, S. and Chen, B. Attentional opponent modelling for multi-agent cooperation. In 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1ŌĆō9. IEEE, 2023. Tang, H., Houthooft, R., Foote, D., Stooke, A., Xi Chen, O., Duan, Y., Schulman, J., DeTurck, F., and Abbeel, P. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Valiente, R., Toghi, B., Pedarsani, R., and Fallah, Y. P. Ro-bustness and adaptability of reinforcement learning-based cooperative autonomous driving in mixed-autonomy traf-fic. IEEE Open Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems , 3:397ŌĆō410, 2022. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, ┼ü., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Wen, M., Kuba, J., Lin, R., Zhang, W., Wen, Y., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. Multi-agent reinforcement learning is a sequence modeling problem. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 35:16509ŌĆō16521, 2022. Xiao, Y., Tan, W., and Amato, C. Asynchronous actor-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:4385ŌĆō4400, 2022. Xu, P., Zhang, J., Yin, Q., Yu, C., Yang, Y., and Huang, K. Subspace-aware exploration for sparse-reward multi-agent tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pp. 11717ŌĆō11725, 2023. Xu, Z., Bai, Y., Li, D., Zhang, B., and Fan, G. Side: State inference for partially observable cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st Inter-national Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multia-gent Systems , pp. 1400ŌĆō1408, 2022. Yang, Y., Chen, G., Wang, W., Hao, X., Hao, J., and Heng, P.-A. Transformer-based working memory for multiagent reinforcement learning with action parsing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:34874ŌĆō 34886, 2022. Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooper-ative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:24611ŌĆō24624, 2022. 12 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Yuan, L., Wang, J., Zhang, F., Wang, C., Zhang, Z., Yu, Y., and Zhang, C. Multi-agent incentive communication via decentralized teammate modeling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, pp. 9466ŌĆō9474, 2022. Zhai, Y., Peng, P., Su, C., and Tian, Y. Dynamic belief for decentralized multi-agent cooperative learning. In Pro-ceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 344ŌĆō352, 2023. Zhang, C. and Lesser, V. Coordinating multi-agent reinforce-ment learning with limited communication. In Proceed-ings of the 2013 international conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems , pp. 1101ŌĆō1108, 2013. Zhao, Q., Zhu, Y., Liu, Z., Wang, Z., and Chen, C. Boosting value decomposition via unit-wise attentive state represen-tation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07182 , 2023a. Zhao, Q., Zhu, Y., Liu, Z., Wang, Z., and Chen, C. Boosting value decomposition via unit-wise attentive state represen-tation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07182 , 2023b. Zhao, X., Pan, Y., Xiao, C., Chandar, S., and Rajendran, J. Conditionally optimistic exploration for cooperative deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , UAI ŌĆÖ23. JMLR.org, 2023c. Zheng, L., Chen, J., Wang, J., He, J., Hu, Y., Chen, Y., Fan, C., Gao, Y., and Zhang, C. Episodic multi-agent reinforcement learning with curiosity-driven exploration. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 3757ŌĆō3769, 2021. Zhu, C., Dastani, M., and Wang, S. A survey of multi-agent reinforcement learning with communication. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08975 , 2022. Zintgraf, L., Devlin, S., Ciosek, K., Whiteson, S., and Hof-mann, K. Deep interactive bayesian reinforcement learn-ing via meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03864 ,2021. 13 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

# A. Further Related Work 

MARL and Exploration. In sparse rewards settings, MARL exploration strategies encompass density-based (Tang et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2023c; Jo et al., 2024), curiosity-driven (Zheng et al., 2021; Li et al., 2024), and information-theoretic (Li et al., 2021; Jiang & Lu, 2021) approaches. MAVEN (Mahajan et al., 2019) aims agents to explore temporally extended coordinated strategies. However, it does not encourage exploration of novel states and the inference of the latent variable still needs to explore the space of agentsŌĆÖ joint behaviors. (Nguyen et al., 2023), which only considers a single learnable controller setting, employs social intrinsic motivation based on AM but relies on a priori knowledge of observation feature representations to compute intrinsic rewards. In contrast, SMPE 2 uses the informative state embeddings to encourage an adversarial type of multi-agent exploration through a simple intrinsic reward method. 

# B. Results on MPEŌĆÖs Double Speaker Listerer 

Due to page limit, we present the results on Double Speaker Listener in this section of the Appendix. As can be clearly shown, SMPE outperforms the other evaluated methods resulting in better joint policies. Interestingly, SMPE consistently demonstrates average episodic reward better than the other methods and converges to optimal policies.  

> Figure 8. Results on Double Speaker Listener

14 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

# C. Extended Preliminaries 

C.1. Multi-Agent Actor Critic (MAA2C): Independent Actors with Centralized Critic 

We consider the CTDE version of the MAA2C algorithm with independent actors and centralized critic, which has been widely used in MARL literature (Papoudakis et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2022; Christianos et al., 2020; Su et al., 2021). The basic idea is that MAA2C constitues a simple extension of the single agent A2C algorithm (Mnih et al., 2016) to the CTDE schema. The actor network of agent i, parameterized by ╬ĖŽĆi , is conditioned only on the local observation history hit. The critic network, whose parameters we denote by ╬Š, uses the full state, st, of the environment and approximates the joint value function V ŽĆ . The actor network is optimized by minimizing the actor-critic policy gradient (PG) loss: 

Lactor (╬ĖŽĆi ) = ŌłÆ log ŽĆ╬Ėi (ait | hit) ┬Ę



rit + ╬│V ŽĆ (st+1 ; ╬ŠŌĆ▓

) ŌłÆ V ŽĆ (st; ╬Š)



ŌłÆ ╬▓H H(ŽĆ╬Ėi (ait | hit)) (8) where H is the traditional entropy term of policy gradient methods. The critic network is trained by minimizing the temporal difference (TD) loss, calculated as follows: 

Lcritic (k) =  V ŽĆ (st; k) ŌłÆ yi2 (9) where yi = rit + ╬│V ŽĆ (st+1 ; k) is the TD target. We note that both the actor and the critic networks are trained on-policy trajectories. 

C.2. MLIAM: Multi-Agent Local Information Agent Modelling (LIAM) 

In the original paper (Papoudakis et al., 2021), LIAM is an agent modelling method controlling one agent i and assuming that the rest ŌłÆi modelled agents take actions based on some fixed set of policies ╬Ā. MLIAM is our custom implementation for the 

multi-agent extension of the single-agent method, LIAM: MLIAM assumes that all agents are learnable and homogeneous (i.e. they share their policy parameters). MLIAMŌĆÖs algorithm is similar to LIAMŌĆÖs, with the only exception that the following now hold for every agent, instead of only the single controlled agent. It assumes the existence of a latent space Z which contains information regarding the policies of the other agents and the dynamics of the environment. Aiming to relate the trajectories of each agent i to the trajectories of the other agents ŌłÆi it utilizes an encoder-decoder framework. Specifically, at a timestep t the recurrent encoder f iw : Žä i ŌåÆ Z takes as input the observation and action trajectory of the agent i until that timestep (oi

> 1: t

, ╬▒ i

> 1: tŌłÆ1

) and produces an embedding zit . Then the decoder f iu : Z ŌåÆ Žä ŌłÆi takes the embedding zit and reconstructs the other agentsŌĆÖ observation and action (oŌłÆit , ╬▒ ŌłÆit ). The encoder-decoder loss of agent i for a horizon H is defined as: 

Li 

> ED

= 1

H

> H

X

> t=1

[( f i,o u (zit ) ŌłÆ oŌłÆit )2 ŌłÆ log f i,ŽĆ u (╬▒ŌłÆit | zit )] (10) where zit = f iw(oi

> :t

, ╬▒ i

> :tŌłÆ1

) and f i,o u , f i,ŽĆ u denote the decodersŌĆÖ output heads for the observations and actions respectively. The learned embedding is used as an additional input in both the actor and the critic considering an augmented space 

Oiaug = Oi ├Ś Z , where the Oi is agentsŌĆÖ original observation space and Z is the embedding space. Considering an A2C reinforcement learning algorithm and a batch of trajectories B the A2C loss of agent i is defined as: 

Li 

> A2C

= E(ot,a t,r t+1 ,o t+1 Ōł╝B)[ 12 (rit+1 + ╬│V ŽĢ(st+1 ) ŌłÆ VŽĢ(st)) 2 ŌłÆ ╦åA log ŽĆ╬Ė (ait | oit, z it ) ŌłÆ ╬▓H H(ŽĆ╬Ė (ait | oit, z it ))] (11) where H is the entropy and ╬▓ a fixed hyperparameter controlling the initial random policy. 

# D. Missing Proof 

Proof of Proposition 2.1 

15 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Proof. Let ŽĆŽł be the joint policy parameterized by the joint parameters Žł Ōłł ╬©. Then, we have: 

V ŌłŚ 

> SM

= max  

> Žē

max  

> Žł

EzŌł╝pŽē

"

EaŌł╝ŽĆŽł ,s ŌĆ▓Ōł╝P (┬Ę| s,a ),o =F (s)

" Ōł×X

> t=0

╬│trt

## 

Ōēź max  

> Žł

EaŌł╝ŽĆ╬Ė ,s ŌĆ▓Ōł╝P (┬Ę| s,a ),o =F (s)

" Ōł×X

> t=0

╬│trt

#

Ōēź max  

> ╬Ė

EaŌł╝ŽĆ╬Ė ,s ŌĆ▓Ōł╝P (┬Ę| s,a ),o =F (s)

" Ōł×X

> t=0

╬│trt

#

= V ŌłŚ

where the inequalities hold because ╬ś ŌŖé ╬© and thus every ŽĆ╬Ė solving the Dec-POMDP problem, could be equivalent with some ŽĆŽł (e.g., when ŽĆŽł completely ignores the latent variable z Ōł╝ pŽē ). On the other hand, V ŌłŚ is the optimal state value function and thus it holds that V ŌłŚ 

> SM

Ōēż V ŌłŚ which implies that V ŌłŚ 

> SM

= V ŌłŚ.

# E. Extended Experimental Setup 

The selected tasks from all three evaluated benchmark environments, namely MPE, LBF and RWARE, are partially observable and rely on the history of the observations of the learning agents. 

E.1. Multi-agent Particle Environment (MPE) 

We used the source code in https://github.com/semitable/multiagent-particle-envs (under the MIT licence). E.1.1. S PREAD : A COOPERATIVE NAVIGATION TASK 

Figure 9. Spread: A cooperative navigation task 

This fully cooperative environment involves N agents and N landmarks, with the primary goal of enabling agents to learn how to cover all landmarks while avoiding collisions. A key challenge is balancing global and local incentives: agents are rewarded based on the proximity of the closest agent to each landmark on a global scale, while local penalties are incurred for collisions. This structure creates a trade-off, requiring agents to coordinate effectively to minimize distances to landmarks while also avoiding collisions in a shared space. The dual challenge of learning collision avoidance and optimal landmark coverage in a multi-agent context demands the development of cooperative strategies, making this task particularly complex for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), especially as N increases. Insights derived from this environment have practical applications in traffic management systems, distributed sensor networks, urban planning, and smart cities. The environment is depicted in Figure 9. ŌĆó Observation space : Agents receive their current velocity, position, and the distance between landmarks and other 16 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

agent positions as their input. ŌĆó Observation size : [24,] ŌĆó Action space : The action space is discrete and involves 5 actions: standing still, moving right, left, up and down. ŌĆó Reward : All agents receive the same team reward, which includes the summed negative minimum distance to any other agent. Additionally, the collisions between any two agents are with a reward of -1. In our experiments, the scenario spread-n means Spread with n agents and n landmarks. E.1.2. D OUBLE SPEAKER -L ISTENER : A COOPERATIVE COMMUNICATION TASK  

> Figure 10. Double Speaker-Listener: A cooperative communication task

This fully cooperative environment features a Speaker and a Listener, where the Speaker is responsible for effectively communicating information about a target landmark while the Listener navigates based on the guidance provided by the SpeakerŌĆÖs signals. Operating in a partially observable setting, this environment introduces challenges such as communication complexity and the need for extensive coordination despite limited perspectives and feedback. The insights derived from this environment have valuable applications in robotic teams, human-robot collaboration, and autonomous navigation systems. The environment is depicted in Figure 10. ŌĆó Observation Space : The speaker agent observes only the colour of the goal landmark which is represented as three numeric values. The listener agent receives as observations its velocity, relative landmark positions as well as the communication of the speaking agent. ŌĆó Observation size : [11,] ŌĆó Action Space : Similar to other MPE environments the listenerŌĆÖs action is space is discrete and includes five actions: (standing still, moving right, left, up and down). The speakerŌĆÖs action space is also discrete however it includes three actions to communicate the goal to the listener. ŌĆó Reward : The reward is common for both agents and it is calculated as the negative square Euclidean distance between the listenerŌĆÖs position and the goal landmarkŌĆÖs position. 

E.2. Level-based Foraging (LBF) 

We used the source code in https://github.com/uoe-agents/lb-foraging (under the MIT licence). The Level-Based Foraging (LBF) (Albrecht & Stone, 2017) benchmark offers fully cooperative environments where agents navigate a two-dimensional grid-world to collect food items. Each agent and food item are assigned a specific level, and agents can move in four directions on the grid, collecting food only when the combined levels of the agents meet or exceed that of the food item. A significant challenge within the LBF environments is the sparse reward structure, as agents must coordinate effectively to simultaneously consume specific food items. The insights derived from this environment have 17 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration  

> Figure 11. Level-based Foraging

practical applications in multi-robot collaboration, resource management in supply chains, and coordination during disaster response efforts. The environment is depicted in Section 4.2. ŌĆó Observation space : All agents receive triplets of the form (x, y, level ) as observations. The number of triples is equal to the sum of the number of foods and the number of agents in the environment. The observations begin with the food triples and are followed by the agents triples. Each triplet contains the x and y coordinates and level of each food item or agent. ŌĆó Observation size : 3 ├Ś (number of agents + number of foods )

ŌĆó Action space : The action space is discrete and involves six actions: standing still, move North, move South, move West, move East, pickup. ŌĆó Reward : In Level-Based Foraging environment agents are rewarded only when they pick up food. This reward depends on both the level of the collected food and the level of each contributing agent, and it is defined for the agent i as follows: 

ri = FoodLevel ŌłŚ AgentLevel 

P FoodLevels P LoadingAgentsLevel Also rewards are normalized in order the sum of all agentŌĆÖs returns on a solved episode to equal one. Last but not least, the LBF task under the name of ŌĆ£Ss-GxG-Pp-Ff-coopŌĆØ corresponds to the cooperative task that has: an GxG grid consisting of P agents, F foods and with partial observability within a window of length S for each agent. 

Remark E.1 . 2s-11x11-3p-2f and 4s-11x11-3p-2f are the most difficult task among the selected LBF ones, because: (a) a high-value state associated with some positive reward is practically impossible to be reached through an initial random policy (because a unique combination of agents must participate in the collection of specific food), and (b) selecting actions that lead to such states is very difficult due to the excessive partial observability of this task. Our results totally agree with the above facts, as no other method manages to find valuable states in the 11x11 tasks, thus resulting only in zero episodic reward over time. 

E.3. Multi-Robot Warehouse (RWARE) 

We used the source code in https://github.com/uoe-agents/robotic-warehouse (under the MIT licence). The Multi-Robot Warehouse (RWARE) (Papoudakis et al., 2020) environment models a fully cooperative, partially observable grid-world in which robots are tasked with locating, delivering, and returning requested shelves to workstations. Agents navigate within a grid that limits their visibility, providing only partial information about nearby agents and shelves, which makes their decision-making processes more complex. One of the primary challenges in this environment is the sparse reward structure; agents receive rewards only upon successfully delivering shelves, requiring them to follow a specific sequence of actions without immediate feedback. This situation demands effective exploration and coordination among 18 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration  

> Figure 12. Multi-Robot Warehouse (RWARE)

agents to achieve their objectives. The insights gained from RWARE have meaningful applications in logistics and warehouse management, where multiple autonomous robots must work together to optimize inventory handling and order fulfillment. The tasks in RWARE vary in the world size, the number of agents, and shelf requests. The default size settings in the Multi-Robot Warehouse environment have four options: ŌĆØtiny,ŌĆØ ŌĆØsmall,ŌĆØ ŌĆØmedium,ŌĆØ and ŌĆØlarge.ŌĆØ These size specify the number of rows and columns for groups of shelves in the warehouse. In the default setup, each group of shelves comprises 16 shelves arranged in an 8x2 grid. The difficulty parameter specifies the total number of requests at a time which by default equals the number of agents (N). One can modify the difficulty level by setting the number of requests to half (ŌĆØ-hardŌĆØ) or double (ŌĆØ-easyŌĆØ) the number of agents. The sparsity of rewards and high-dimensional sparse observations make RWARE a challenging environment for agents, as they need to perform a series of actions correctly before receiving any rewards. The environment is depicted in Figure 12. ŌĆó Observation space : The environment is partially observable, and agents can only observe a 3x3 grid containing information about surrounding agents and shelves. Specifically the observations include the agentŌĆÖs position, rotation, and whether it is carrying a shelf, the location and rotation of other robots, the shelves and whether they are currently in the request queue. ŌĆó Observation size : [71,] ŌĆó Action space : The action space is discrete and involves five actions: turn left, turn right, forward, load/unload shelf. ŌĆó Reward : The agents receive rewards only when they successfully complete the delivery of shelves. 19 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

E.4. Extended Ablation Study 

E.4.1. C OMPARISON OF SMPE 2 TO SMPE( no intr )

Figure 13. Comparison of SMPE 2 to SMPE( no intr ) on the three most difficult evaluated LBF tasks 

E.4.2. F URTHER RESULTS ON THE COMPARISON OF SMPE 2 TO MLIAM In this subsection of the Appendix, we provide more results on the comparison of our SMPE 2 with MLIAM in Figure 14. 

Figure 14. Further ablation study results on the comparison between SMPE and MLIAM on MPE and LBF 

20 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

E.4.3. W HY DO WE NEED A SECOND CRITIC FOR TRAINING wi W.R.T. POLICY OPTIMIZATION ?In this subsection of the Appendix, we study why SMPE 2 really needs two critics: one ( ╬Š) for providing the advantages needed for training the actor and one ( k) needed for training wi with respect to policy optimization. As can be clearly seen from Figure 15, the selection of two critic models is essential for the training of SMPE 2, as the baseline ( no standard critic )which uses only the critic k for both purposes displays both worse average episodic reward and convergence. More specifically, it suffers from high variance, attributed to the fact that in some runs it entirely diverges from good policies leading to very poor performance.     

> Figure 15. Ablation study on why we need the second critic model: Baseline SMPE 2(no standard critic ) is our method using the critic k,that is the one conditioned on wi, also for providing the advantages needed to train the actor.

E.4.4. A BLATION STUDY ON ╬╗REC 

Figure 16 illustrates the importance of ╬╗rec to the contribution of the reconstruction loss to the overall objective in a Spread task. As can be clearly seen from the plot, lowering the value of ╬╗rec worsens both convergence and average episodic reward in this task. We attribute this to the fact that lowering the value of ╬╗rec leads to worse state modelling, and thus the agents are not capable of inferring good beliefs about the unobserved state. Interestingly, as we increase the value of ╬╗rec , the overall performance deteriorates slightly, while displaying higher variance. This is because the reconstruction term is penalized more in the overall objective, dominating the policy optimization term.   

> Figure 16. Ablation study on ╬╗rec

21 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

E.4.5. A BLATION STUDY ON ╬╗NORM 

Regarding ╬╗norm , in the ablation study we showed that if it equals 0, then it can negatively affect the algorithm performance, because, a feasible solution for wi is to converge to 0. Here, we provide a further ablation study in Figure 17, which shows that if ╬╗norm is set to a value ranging from [0 .1, 1] , then performance is pretty much the same. 

Figure 17. Ablation study on ╬╗norm 

E.4.6. R ESULTS ON LEARNING THE STATE BELIEF REPRESENTATIONS WITH RESPECT TO POLICY OPTIMIZATION 

In this subsection of the Appendix, we provide more results on the significance to learn the state belief representations with respect to policy optimization in Figure 18. As we discussed in Section 4.4, learning the state belief representations with respect to policy optimization can yield significant improvements in terms of average episodic reward and convergence. 

Figure 18. Ablation study on learning the state belief representations with respect to policy optimization 

E.4.7. S TUDYING THE DYNAMIC NATURE OF THE INTRINSIC REWARD 

In this subsection of the Appendix, we examine the dynamic nature of the intrinsic rewards proposed in SMPE 2. As highlighted in Section 3.2, to enhance stability, we make zi more stable by avoiding significant changes in the parameters (Žēi, ŽĢi) between successive training episodes. To achieve this, we perform periodic hard updates of Žēi and ŽĢi using a fixed number of training time steps as the update period. Figure 19 shows that the intrinsic rewards do not fluctuate but rather decrease smoothly throughout training until they reach a minimal plateau. Such a behavior is what we expected: the agents to explore the state space and gradually to converge to more deterministic optimal policies. 22 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Figure 19. Ablation study: Studying the dynamic nature of the intrinsic reward 

Embeddings Accuracy 

zi 57.5% 

zi (without KL) 99.3% 

zi (without wi) 80.8% 

Table 1. Quantitative ablation study on the embeddings zi in an LBF task at the 45th time step: Logistic Regression on 5-fold cross validation using the t-SNE representations as the training data and the agent IDs as the labels. 

E.4.8. F URTHER T -SNE VISUALIZATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF THE STATE BELIEF EMBEDDINGS 

Figure 20. SMPE 2 Figure 21. SMPE 2 (LKL = 0 )

We trained a logistic regression classifier using t-SNE representations as training data and agent IDs as labels, and performed standard 5-fold cross validation. Table 1 validates that SMPE 2ŌĆÖs beliefs are cohesive, as they are well entangled and difficult to separate (57.5% accuracy). In contrast, SMPE 2 without either LKL or wi forms much less cohesive beliefs, as it achieves perfect accuracy (99.3%) or high accuracy (80.3%), respectively. We note that the perfect score of SMPE 2 without LKL is due to the fact that if the agentsŌĆÖ beliefs do not share the same prior, then they can be formed in totally different (and easily separated) regions. The above results also validate the importance of wi for producing more cohesive zi.E.4.9. I S SMPE 2 FLEXIBLE ? C AN WE USE MAPPO AS THE BACKBONE ALGORITHM ?To address question Q6 , we evaluate SMPE 2 using MAPPO as the backbone algorithm. We denote this method by SMPE PPO. Figure 22 highlights the flexibility of our method, as SMPE PPO significantly outperforms its backbone counterpart in all benchmarks. Remarkably, SMPE PPO almost perfectly solves the 9x9-3p-2f task, with the backbone MAPPO demonstrating very poor performance. 23 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Figure 22. SMPE 2 is flexible: SMPE PPO against its backbone algorithm MAPPO 

E.4.10. F URTHER ABLATION STUDY ON THE EXPRESSIVENESS OF zi : L OSS CURVES 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> Steps 1e7
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> Self-Supervised Reconstruction Loss
> lbf-2s-9x9-3p-2f-coop

Figure 23. Self-supervised reconstruction loss on LBF 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0   

> Steps 1e7
> 250
> 500
> 750
> 1000
> 1250
> 1500
> 1750
> 2000
> Self-Supervised Reconstruction Loss
> Spread-8

Figure 24. Self-supervised reconstruction loss on Spread 

Figures 23 and 24 show that the reconstruction loss is decreasing throughout the training of SMPE 2, and thus zi, conditioned on wi, is able to reconstruct informative features (identified by wi) of the global state. 24 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

E.4.11. E XTRA ABLATION STUDY ON THE EXPRESSIVENESS AM FILTERS wi 

> Figure 25. Ablation study: Goal: The optimal policy (found by SMPE 2) is all players to eat the right food. Agent1: Does not know where both the right food and agent3 are located, or their levels, and seeks to find them. Moreover, it seeks to find if Agent2 sees the right food. Agent2: Has filters very similar to Agent1 (as expected). Agent3: Knows where the right food is located and its level, and seeks to find if the others know it as well and have the required levels for it, as well as if the others are near to the left food. It has very similar filters for both Agent1 and Agent2 (as expected).

In the cooperative LBF task of Figure 25, all players must eat at the same time a food, whose level equals the sum of the playersŌĆÖ levels. Each player has a limited sight range of 4 boxes. Figure 25 demonstrates a global state of the LBF task, along with the AM filters wi of agents 1 (bottom) and 3 (top). In this state, agent1 and agent2 observe each other (i.e., their locations and levels), while agent3 observes food (right) (i.e., its location and level). The figure is an instance of the best SMPE 2 policy, which guides all players to eat food (right) at the same time. In the figure, the features that are not highlighted (with blue/orange) are filtered out as uninformative. The figure illustrates the expressivity of wi. It shows that uninformative state features are blocked by wi by assigning them low weights, if either: (a) are easily inferred through reconstruction but are redundant for enriching zi (e.g., Agent2/Position x (0.05) see the bottom left filters), or (b) do not help policy learning (e.g., Food(right)/Position x (0.12) see the bottom left filters). More specifically: ŌĆó Regarding Agent1, the agent does not know where Agent3 and food (right) are located, or their levels, and seeks to find them (see the values highlighted with blue). In doing so, the AM filters of Agent1 corresponding to both Agent2 and Agent3 block information about food (left) since it is irrelevant to its policy. Also, the filters corresponding to Agent2 block information regarding both Agent3 and the location of food (right) because they are not observed by Agent2. Moreover, these filters block Agent2/Position x but not Agent2/Position y, because Agent1 and Agent2 have the same x-coordinate. We dismissed the AM filters of Agent2, as they were pretty much the same as those of Agent1. ŌĆó Regarding Agent3, the agent seeks to find if the others know as well where food (right) is located, and if they have the required levels for it, as well as if the others observe food (left) (see the values highlighted with blue). Its AM filters block (a) the features that describe the location of food (left), and (b) the positions of the other agents. As for the latter, Agent3 is already near food (right), which is the target of the joint policy, and waits for the other agents to appear on its sight in order to eat food (right) at the same time. Moreover, the filters corresponding to both Agent1 and Agent2 are very similar, as expected, because both agents have the same levels and are located next to each other. 25 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

ŌĆó We highlight with orange the high-value features which intuitively were selected by SMPE to facilitate the reconstruction training, helping zi incorporate useful information about the neighborhood of the agent. E.4.12. C OMPARISON OF RUNNING TIMES OF THE EXAMINED METHODS 

In Table 2, we compare the running times of the examined methods in LBF: 2s-11x11-2p-2f , using the following specs: a GPU RTX 3080ti, a CPU 11th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-11900 and a 64 GB RAM. 

Remark E.2 . In our experiments, SMPE 2 is faster approximately 25 times than MASER, 30 times than EMC, 17 times than EOI and 2 times than ATM in lbf: 2s-12x12-2p-2f .

MARL Method Running Time 

MAA2C 0d 00h 37m COMA 0d 00h 54m ATM 0d 02h 32m EOI 0d 17h 11m EMC 1d 05h 34m MASER 1d 01h 08m 

SMPE 2 0d 01h 13m  

> Table 2. Comparison of running times of the examined methods on lbf: 2s-12x12-2p-2f

26 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

# F. Implementation Details 

Our implementation 2 is built on top of the EPyMARL 3 (under the MIT License) python library. For all baselines, we used the open source code of the original paper. SMPE 2 uses the standard MAA2C architecture (see EPyMARL) and three-layer MLPs for both the Encoder-Decoder (ED) and for the AM filters. It is worth noting that as for ED in our experiments we did not observe any further improvement in performance when using standard RNNs (such as GRUs, or LSTM) instead of MLPs. In practice, we update ED parameters every NED steps. Last but not least, for all benchmark settings, agents (for all algorithms) used shared policy parameters, except for Spread 3-4-5 where each agent had its own parameter weights. 

Name Description Value 

H (mpe-lbf-rware) time horizon 10M-10M-40M 

Nenvs number of parallel envs of MAA2C 10 

Nep ŌłÆlen (mpe-lbf-rware) maximum length of an episode 25-50-500 

Ntup number of environment steps before optimization 100 

ND replay buffer capacity (for ED training) 50,000 

Nbs ED replay buffer batch size 16 

NED update ED parameters every NED time steps 2000 

Nwtup update target filter parameters every Nwtup time steps 100,000 lr ŽĆ learning rate for RL algorithm 0.0005 lr w (rware) learning rate for filter update 0.0005 (0.00005) lr w critic (mpe, rware) learning rate for filter update in critic loss 0.00005 (0.0000005) lr ED learning rate for ED 0.0005 hidden dim (rware) hidden dimensionality of Actor and Critic NN 128 (64) latent dim (mpe) latent dimensionality of ED 32 (64) 

╬│ discount factor 0.99 

╬╗rec (lbf) lambda coefficient for Lrec 1 (0.5) 

╬╗KL lambda coefficient for LKL 0.1 

╬╗norm (mpe-lbf-rware) lambda coefficient for Lnorm 0.1-1-0.1 

╬▓H entropy coefficient in policy gradient 0.01 

╬▓ (lbf-rware) intrinsic reward coefficient 0.1-0.001 

shared (mpe-spr8-lbf-rware) shared policy params F-T-T-T 

shared ED shared ED params F (False)  

> Table 3. Implementation Details of SMPE 2
> 2Our official source code can be found at https://github.com/ddaedalus/smpe.
> 3see https://github.com/uoe-agents/epymarl

27 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Name Value batch size 10 hidden dimension 64 learning rate 0.0005 reward standardisation True network type GRU entropy coefficient 0.01 target update 200 buffer size 10 

╬│ 0.99 observation agent id True observation last action True n-step 5epochs 4clip 0.2  

> Table 4. Hyperparameters for MAPPO

Name Value batch size 32 hidden dimension 64 learning rate 0.0005 reward standardisation True network type GRU evaluation epsilon 0.0 epsilon anneal 50000 epsilon start 1.0 epsilon finish 0.05 target update 200 buffer size 5000 

╬│ 0.99 observation agent id True observation last action True episodic memory capacity 1000000 episodic latent dimension 4soft update weight 0.005 weighting term ╬╗ of episodic loss 0.1 curiosity decay rate ( ╬Ęt) 0.9 number of attention heads 4attention regulation coefficient 0.001 mixing network hidden dimension 32 hypernetwork dimension 64 hypernetwork number of layers 2 

> Table 5. Hyperparameters for EMC

28 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Name Value optimizer RMSProp hidden dimension 64 learning rate 0.0005 reward standardisation False network type GRU evaluation epsilon 0.0 epsilon anneal 50000 epsilon start 1.0 epsilon finish 0.05 target update 200 buffer size 5000 

╬│ 0.99 observation agent id True observation last action True mixing network hidden dimension 32 representation network dimension 128 

╬▒ 0.5 

╬╗ 0.03 

╬╗I 0.0008 

╬╗E 0.00006 

╬╗D 0.00014  

> Table 6. Hyperparameters for MASER

Name Value optimizer Adam batch size 10 hidden dimension 128 learning rate 0.0005 reward standardisation True network type GRU target update 200 buffer size 10 

╬│ 0.99 observation agent id True observation last action True n-step 5entropy coefficient 0.01 classifier ( ŽĢ) learning 0.0001 classifier ( ŽĢ) batch size 256 classifier ( ╬▓2) 0.1  

> Table 7. Hyperparameters for EOI

29 Enhancing Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Modelling and Adversarial Exploration 

Algorithm 1 State Modelling for Policy Enhancement and Exploration (SMPE 2)

1: Initialize Nenvs parallel environments (required for the backbone MAA2C) 

2: Initialize N actor networks with random parameters Žł1, . . . , Žł N

3: Initialize the critic networks and their target networks with random parameters k, ╬Š and kŌĆ▓, ╬ŠŌĆ▓

4: Initialize N encoder-decoder networks with random parameters ŽĢ1, . . . , ŽĢ N and Žē1, . . . , Žē N

5: Initialize a replay buffer D of maximum capacity ND

6: Initialize N weight networks with random parameters ŽĢw 

> 1

, . . . , ŽĢ wN

7: Initialize N target weight networks (for ╦£wi) with random parameters (ŽĢw 

> 1

)ŌĆ▓, . . . , (ŽĢwN )ŌĆ▓

8: for time step t = 1 , . . . , H do 

9: for agent i = 1 , . . . , N do 

10: Receive current observation oit

11: Sample belief zit Ōł╝ qŽĢi (zi | oit)

12: Sample action ait from ŽĆŽłi (ait | hit, z it )

13: end for 

14: Execute actions and receive states st+1 , observations ot+1 and the shared reward rt

15: for agent i = 1 , . . . , N do 

16: Calculate the intrinsic reward ╦årit and compute total reward ╦£rit = rt + ╬▓╦årit using the SH function, and use ╦£rit as the reward of agent i

17: end for 

18: Store the received (joint) transition (st, a t, o t, ╦£rt, s t+1 , o t+1 ) in D

19: if Parallel Episodes Terminate then 

20: for agent i = 1 , . . . , N do 

21: Update Žłi on the sampled trajectories by minimizing Lactor of the Equation (8) 

22: Update ╬Š on the sampled trajectories by minimizing Lcritic of the Equation (6) 

23: Update ŽĢwi and k on the sampled trajectories by minimizing Lw 

> critic

of the Equation (6) 

24: end for 

25: Restart a new episode for each of Nenvs parallel environments 

26: end if 

27: if condition for training the encoder-decoders is met ( NED ) then 

28: for agent i = 1 , . . . , N do 

29: Update Žēi on D using batch size Nbs by minimizing Lrec (Equation (3)) and LKL (Equation (5)) 

30: Update ŽĢi on D using batch size Nbs by minimizing Lrec (Equation (3)) 

31: Update ŽĢwi on D using batch size Nbs by minimizing Lrec (Equation (3)) and Lnorm (Equation (4)) 

32: end for 

33: end if 

34: if condition for updating the target policy networks is met ( Ntup ) then 

35: Update ╬ŠŌĆ▓ = ╬Š and kŌĆ▓ = k

36: end if 

37: if condition for updating the target filter networks is met ( Nwtup ) then 

38: for agent i = 1 , . . . , N do 

39: Update (ŽĢwi )ŌĆ▓ = ŽĢwi

40: end for 

41: end if 

42: end for 

30