Title: Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=AxqgpcL90a

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

Austin A. Nguyen 1 Anri Gu 1 Michael P. Wellman 1

# Abstract 

Iterative extension of empirical game models through deep reinforcement learning (RL) has proved an effective approach for finding equilib-ria in complex games. When multiple equilib-ria exist, we may have preferences among solu-tions. We address this equilibrium selection issue in the context of Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO), a flexible game-solving framework based on deep RL, by skewing strategy generation to-wards higher-welfare solutions. At each iteration, we create an exploration policy that imitates high welfare-yielding behavior and train a response to the current solution, regularized to be similar to the exploration policy. With no additional simu-lation expense, our approach, named Ex 2PSRO, tends to find higher welfare equilibria than vanilla PSRO in two benchmarks: a sequential bargain-ing game and a social dilemma game. Further ex-periments demonstrate Ex 2PSRO’s composability with other PSRO variants and illuminate the re-lationship between exploration policy choice and algorithmic performance. 

# 1. Introduction 

Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) research addresses two core challenges: scalability and non-stationarity . Scalability refers to how the relevant search space for training grows exponentially with the number of players and strategies. Non-stationarity describes how agents’ learning contexts change as their observations and rewards depend on the evolving strategies of other agents. If the goal is to specify policies for distributed agents under unified control, these challenges can be addressed under the              

> 1Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michi-gan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Correspondence to: Austin A. Nguyen <ngaustin@umich.edu >,Anri Gu <an-rigu@umich.edu >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

paradigm of centralized training decentralized execution 

(Rashid et al., 2020; Lowe et al., 2017). When the agents are independently controlled, it makes sense to frame the problem in terms of solving a game. In a game formulation, non-stationarity can be understood as arising from strategic interactions among agent decisions. Our work builds on a standard framework in this genre called Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO) (Lanctot et al., 2017). PSRO uses a form of population-based training, where the set of available policies (strategies) is iteratively extended by deriving best responses to the evolving game model. PSRO can also be viewed as a form of empirical game-theoretic analysis (EGTA) (Wellman et al., 2025), as the game model is estimated through agent-based simulation. PSRO addresses scalability and non-stationarity by focusing on an enumerated set of strategies from a large space and training one agent at a time in a context where other agents’ strategies are fixed. The efficacy of such iterative methods depends on the ability to identify strategies that cover the relevant game features and contribute to game solutions. Alternative approaches to 

strategy exploration (Jordan et al., 2010) generate different sequences of game models and thus determine how quickly a solution is found (Wang et al., 2022). The method of strategy exploration can also shape which solution is found, that is, influence equilibrium selection for games with multiple strategic equilibria (Wang & Wellman, 2024). This work addresses equilibrium selection by steering strat-egy exploration toward solutions with desirable character-istics. Specifically, we extend PSRO by leveraging the simulation data already generated by the algorithm to iden-tify policy elements that seem promising for high-welfare solutions. Using behavior cloning, we train an exploration policy that reflects the promising behavior found in sim-ulation traces. We then modify the process of training a best-response strategy, by adding a regularization term that biases the output to be similar to the exploration policy. This 

ex plicit form of controlled ex ploration in policy space gives the algorithm its name: Ex 2PSRO. The primary contribution of this work is a method based on policy-level regularization for strategy exploration in service 1Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

of equilibrium selection. Through experiments on two game classes for which equilibrium selection is paramount—a social dilemma game and a bargaining game—we find that Ex 2PSRO tends to produce higher welfare solutions than the PSRO baseline. Further experiments combining Ex 2PSRO with existing high-welfare equilibrium selection approaches demonstrate its modularity and ability to improve welfare on other PSRO variants. 

# 2. Terminology and Notation 

A symmetric game Γ is represented in normal form by a tuple (Π , U, n ), where n is the number of players, Π their set of available strategies, and payoff function U : Π n −→ Rn

maps joint strategies π = ( π1, . . . , π n) to vectors of payoffs. Symmetry dictates that U be invariant to permutations of player position: U (perm (π)) = perm (U (π)) .1 Policy π ∈

Π is called a pure strategy , and σ ∈ ∆(Π) is a mixed strategy . A subscript −1 indicates all players except one. For instance, π−1 is the joint strategy of all other players, with “other” clear from context. We write the payoff for playing π when the others play π−1 as u(π, π −1), where u

refers to the element of vector U indicating the payoff given to the player invoking strategy π. When the others play joint mixed strategy σ−1, the payoff is given by expectation: 

u(π, σ −1) = Eπ−1∼σ−1 u(π, π −1). (1) Given our symmetry assumption, we often overload notation to allow a strategy (pure or mixed) to stand for a symmetric joint strategy (i.e., all play the same). The welfare of σ

refers to the expected summed payoffs across all players when playing strategy σ.Likewise under symmetry, a player’s best response to all oth-ers playing σ is given by BR (σ) = arg max π∈Π u(π, σ −1).Mixed strategy σ∗ is a (symmetric) Nash equilibrium 

(NE) iff σ∗ ∈ BR (σ∗). The potential gains of deviating from symmetric play of σ is called regret : Regret (σ) = max π′∈Π u(π′, σ −1) − Eπ∼σ u(π, σ −1). By definition, if 

σ∗ is a NE, its regret is zero. An empirical game model 

Γ = (Π , U , n ) is a normal-form game over strategy set Π (a finite subset of a larger policy space Π), with payoff function 

U estimated through simulation. 

Reinforcement learning (RL) models the environment as a 

Markov Decision Process (MDP). A policy πθ is defined as a mapping from the MDP’s observation space O to a prob-ability simplex over the action space A: πθ : O − → ∆( A).The probability of choosing action at given observation ot

is given by πθ (at | ot). When an agent applies action at

given observation ot, a reward rt is observed. Each sim-ulation of the environment generates a set of trajectories 

> 1We assume symmetry throughout this paper for convenience, as our experiments are performed on symmetric games. Extension to non-symmetric or role-symmetric games is discussed below.

τ = {τ 1, . . . , τ n} (one for each player). Each trajectory is a sequence of observations, actions, and rewards for a player p over time: τ pj = {(opt , a pt , r pt )}Tt=1 .

# 3. Related Work 

Policy regularization is widely used in RL to instill prior behavior during training (Cheng et al., 2019; Rudner et al., 2021; Bakhtin et al., 2022). In offline RL, regularization can encourage similarity between the learned policy and the dataset’s behavior, reducing distribution shift (Wu et al., 2019; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021). In online RL, self-imitation learning reinforces behaviors that yield de-sired outcomes in sparse-reward contexts (Oh et al., 2018). In MARL, policy regularization has been used to promote coordination (Roy et al., 2020) or as an alternative to en-tropy regularization (Su & Lu, 2022). Regularized Nash Dynamics (R-NaD) (P ´erolat et al., 2021) demonstrated the use of regularization as part of a game-theoretic MARL regime. Approaches like Follow the Regularized Leader (FoReL) have also utilized regularization to balance the exploitation-exploration tradeoff (P´ erolat et al., 2021). The PSRO algorithm (Lanctot et al., 2017) works by iter-atively extending an empirical game model Γ = (Π , U , n )

using RL. We initialize Π, for example with a single ran-dom policy. PSRO extends Γ at each iteration through these steps: (1) update U by estimating payoffs for all strategy profiles (i.e., joint strategies over Π) through simulation, (2) extract a target profile σ⊤ by applying a meta-strategy solver (MSS) to Γ, and (3) derive a best-response policy 

π⋆ ∈ Π by applying deep RL in an environment where other players are fixed to play σ⊤ and add π⋆ to Π.A key idea of PSRO is abstracting the selection of best-response target, through the MSS. Different MSSs generate different response sequences and hence guide strategy explo-ration. Using replicator dynamics (RD) (Taylor & Jonker, 1978) or any other Nash solver as MSS corresponds to the 

double oracle method (McMahan et al., 2003). The original PSRO paper (Lanctot et al., 2017) noted that DO overfits to the current solution and introduced projected replicator dy-namics (PRD) as an MSS that produces approximate Nash equilibrium. The PSRO literature has investigated a variety of alternative MSSs, as well as other variants designed to reduce computational cost or exploit game model structure (Bighashdel et al., 2024). A recent study by Wang & Wellman (2024) investigated how varying the response objective can affect the behavior of PSRO, including its selection of equilibria. In particular, this work showed that optimizing responses for a combina-tion of own and other-agent utility could steer PSRO toward higher-welfare equilibria. These objectives may incorpo-rate broader measures (e.g. total social welfare), enabling 2Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

PSRO to discover more desirable equilibria. Related re-search has focused on integrating diversity measures into response objectives to ensure thorough exploration of policy space (Balduzzi et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2022; Perez-Nieves et al., 2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2020). 

# 4. Explicit Exploration 

Consider the simple 2-player game shown in Fig. 1. There are two symmetric equilibria: playing A and B with equal probability or playing C. The latter Pareto dominates, but starting double oracle (or PSRO) from A or B would pro-duce the former. Even if we replaced best-response with an optimization of social welfare (or any linear combination with individual payoff), C would never be selected when the other player is fixed at a mixture of A and B. A B CA 2,2 2,3 1,–2 B 3,2 1,1 2,–1 C –2,1 –1,2 5,5  

> Figure 1. A 2-player, symmetric normal-form game. Starting from either A or B, PSRO converges to an equilibrium mixture over A and B (regardless of MSS), which is Pareto-dominated by (C, C).

This example highlights that discovering high-welfare equi-libria sometimes requires players to add strategies that are currently suboptimal (i.e., with respect to any other agents’ generated strategies), but could ultimately lead to more favorable equilibria. In the absence of an all-knowing co-ordinator, we need some way to identify and steer strategy exploration toward potentially effective joint behavior. In the context of the PSRO framework, this suggests we may need to produce strategies that could not be found through best-response operations alone, regardless of MSS. 

4.1. Extracting Desired Behavior 

To guide exploration, we first identify behavior that could lead to higher welfare equilibria. Ex 2PSRO does this by scanning simulation data for traces that seem to produce high-welfare outcomes. To that end, Ex 2PSRO extracts a buffer B of N trajectories {τj }Nj that maximize some crite-rion C(τj ). In symmetric games, 2 we employ a maximin welfare criterion: 

C(τj ) = min  

> p

(V pj ), (2)  

> 2Symmetry entails we can evaluate player payoffs on the same scale when a given trajectory plays out differently for various players. For non-symmetric games, payoff normalization (using empirically estimated minimum across players return percentile as
> C(τj)) and player-specific exploration policies would be required.

where V pj = P|τj | 

> t=1

rpt is player p’s return in trajectory τj .This criterion maximizes welfare and disregards trajectories where welfare is high at the expense of any one player. Trajectories are collected from all simulation queries (i.e., empirical game updates, response training). Among the observed trajectories τj , B selects the N with the highest criterion score C(τj ).3

4.2. Constructing Exploration Policies 

We reiterate that an exploration policy should introduce el-ements that potentially incorporate pro-welfare properties. Since our criterion C(τj ) expressly selects for that behavior, it is reasonable that the exploration strategy should match be-havior in B. We denote an exploration policy at Ex 2PSRO’s 

ith iteration by πi 

> ex

. Ex 2PSRO trains πi 

> ex

by using behavior cloning (BC) on B. Specifically, we create a policy that maximizes: 

πi 

> ex

(a | o) = arg max 

> πθ

E(πθ (ak | ok)) ( ok, a k) ∼ B , (3) where we ignore the reward component of trajectories in 

B. Note that πi 

> ex

is not itself added to the empirical game but rather used to steer πiθ (Ex 2PSRO’s response policy at iteration i), in a particular way. This is discussed in the next section. πi 

> ex

is estimated using a neural network with a softmax output layer and is optimized using cross-entropy loss. We defer further details to Apps. A.1 and B. 

4.3. Policy Regularization Objective 

We now demonstrate how exploration policy πi 

> ex

is used to influence the added strategy πiθ . Ex 2PSRO builds on the baseline’s - “vanilla” PSRO’s - best-response step of the algorithm. At each iteration i, vanilla PSRO trains an approximate best-response policy π∗iθ to optimize the objec-tive: 

Ji(θ) := Eπθ |iTX

> t=1

rt,π∗iθ ≈ arg max 

> πθ

Ji(θ),

(4) where rt is the player’s reward at time t, T refers to the (potentially infinite) horizon, θ represents the parameters of the policy πθ , and ≈ underscores the use of deep RL to approximate the best-response. The expectation in (4) is conditioned on i, reflecting the best-response target selected by PSRO’s MSS at that iteration. We insert a regularization term Ri(θ) that steers πiθ to be more similar to πi 

> ex

. More formally, let Ri(θ) be a mea-sure of the distance of a policy parameterized by θ to the 

> 3Stochasticity in returns is not accounted for, so chance success affects the selection.

3Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

exploration policy at iteration i. Specifically, we define: 

Ri(θ) = DKL (πi 

> ex

∥ πθ ), (5) where DKL (. ∥ .) denotes KL divergence. Ri(θ) is esti-mated through sampling and assumes R, the RL oracle’s replay buffer, defines the prior over observations ot:

DKL (πi 

> ex

∥ πθ ) ≈

Eot∼R 

X

> a∈A

πi 

> ex

(a | ot) log 

 πi 

> ex

(a | ot)

πθ (a | ot)



, (6) Ex 2PSRO encourages exploration by introducing Ri(θ) as a regularization term in the response objective and weighting 

Ri(θ) by βi at iteration i:

πiθ ≈ arg max 

> πθ

(Ji(θ) − βiRi(θ)) . (7) Intuitively, the objective (7) skews the response in the direc-tion of the exploration policy. πi 

> ex

is constructed to reflect high-welfare-yielding behavior, so the objective encourages the introduction of strategies that contain more pro-welfare elements. Moreover, since the trajectory buffer is shared amongst all players, they are all regularized towards behav-iors that ideally coordinate well with each other. This can help address the issue posed by the example in Fig. 1. Ide-ally, behavior in B and strategy C would be similar. Then, regularization toward B’s behavior would skew strategy exploration by encouraging the addition of high-welfare yielding policies similar to strategy C. We underscore that trajectory buffer sharing does not modify game dynamics— each player still only has access to their own information. This is discussed further in App. F. 

4.4. Ex 2PSRO Algorithm 

Many PSRO implementations use value-based RL methods to train approximate best responses. Our explicit explo-ration approach employs regularization defined in policy space. As regularizing value estimates by a policy is unde-fined, value-based methods are unsuitable. Accordingly, we adopt the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) method to train approximate best responses, specifically its discrete implementation (Christodoulou, 2019; Zhou et al., 2022). Ex 2PSRO (Alg. 1) modifies SAC’s actor update by augmenting its objective with the regularization term from Eq. (6) . For consistency in comparison, we use SAC for both Ex 2PSRO and vanilla PSRO’s best responses, where the latter’s regularization strength βi is set to zero for each iteration i.The first iteration of Ex 2PSRO is nearly identical to that of PSRO. It starts by initializing random strategies for each player, creating an unregularized best response π∗1 

> θ

using 

Algorithm 1 Ex 2PSRO 

Input : Max number of trajectories N , meta-strategy solver 

M, Initial regularization βinit , Regularization decay steps 

Sβ , PSRO iterations T , number of players n

Output : Strategy set Π, Profile σT 

> 1:

Initialize empty empirical game Γ : (Π , U , n ) 

> 2:

Initialize strategy set w/ random policy Π ← { π0 

> θ

} 

> 3:

Initialize β0 ← βinit  

> 4:

Update empirical game Γ 

> 5:

Initialize B0 with used trajectories  

> 6:

Initialize B ← N trajectories in B0 maximizing C(τj ) 

> 7:

for each PSRO iteration i of to T do  

> 8:

Compute πi 

> ex

using B and Eq. 3 if i > 1 

> 9:

Compute response πiθ using βi, πi 

> ex

, σi 

> −1

and Eq. 7 

> 10:

Update strategy sets Π ← Π ∪ πiθ 

> 11:

Update empirical game Γ 

> 12:

Store used trajectories in Bi 

> 13:

B ← Top N trajectories τj ∈ {B i ∪ B} w/ Eq. 2  

> 14:

Update joint profile σi+1 ← M (Γ)  

> 15:

Anneal βi ← max(0 , βinit (Sβ −i) 

> Sβ

) 

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

return Π, σT

deep reinforcement learning, updating the empirical game 

Γ, and updating meta-strategies M(Γ) . Ex 2PSRO creates an unregularized best response π∗1 

> θ

because B at that point only contains trajectories from random rollouts, which may contain uninformative and possibly detrimental behavior to regularize towards for certain exploration policy choices. In our implementation, the initial policies sample uniformly from actions in all states. We describe in detail how the trajectory buffers B are built. Let Bi denote the trajectories gathered from training itera-tion i’s best response and empirical game updates. These are added to the trajectory buffer, B ← B ∪ B i. Then, Ex 2PSRO filters B by taking the top N trajectories that maximize criterion C(τ ).The Ex 2PSRO procedure is depicted schematically in Fig. 2. We define or train exploration policy πi 

> ex

. Next, we train our regularized best responses by optimizing (7) with SAC, augmenting its actor loss with the regularization term. Ex 2PSRO then updates the empirical game Γ and, subse-quently, meta-strategies using the MSS M. The regulariza-tion strength βi is initialized to βinit and linearly annealed across Sβ PSRO iterations, where βinit and Sβ are hyper-parameters. This process repeats until the max number of Ex 2PSRO iterations is reached. 4Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning                   

> Figure 2. After the first iteration, Ex 2PSRO cycles through three steps: (1) updating the empirical game model Γ, (2) deriving the response target M(Γ) = σiusing MSS Mwhile training exploration policy πi
> ex using trajectories {τj}Nj=1 , and (3) training a new strategy
> πiθ. Following steps (1) and (3), all observed simulation trajectories τjare added to buffer Band filtered using criterion C(τj).

# 5. Results 

5.1. Environments 

We first demonstrate how Ex 2PSRO operates in a hand-crafted dynamic environment (Fig. 3) exhibiting the coor-dination issue exemplified in Fig. 1. Players alternately choose to move left or right, and the episode ends after 10 total actions. There are two equilibria of interest. The first, which we refer to as Equilibrium 1, consists of players going between states s0 and s1, repeatedly gathering +1 reward. The second, analogously Equilibrium 2, has players reach and alternate between states s7 and s8, which collects lower rewards initially but dominates the first in overall return. Co-ordination is vital in achieving the latter equilibrium. The second equilibrium strategy is a best-response only to strate-gies similar to itself, meaning it cannot be found through strict best-response. Using a welfare-oriented objective does not help in this case.  

> Figure 3. Hand-crafted Markov Decision Process

In this proof-of-concept MDP environment, Vanilla PSRO and GRO welfare do not add the strategy to move right towards s7 and s8 to the empirical game, therefore never discovering Equilibrium 2. They both achieve a welfare of 20.0. GRO Welfare, which optimizes welfare at each iteration, is inherently limited by its focus on myopic wel-        

> Figure 4. Welfare trends over PSRO iterations using Vanilla, Gen-eralized Response Objectives with α=.5optimizing welfare, and Ex 2PSRO with βinit =.1. in the proof-of-concept MDP.

fare improvements. In contrast, Ex 2PSRO bookmarks high-welfare trajectories that travel to states s7 and s8, constructs strategies similar to such behavior, and eventually includes relevant strategies in Γ to discover Equilibrium 2. Ex 2PSRO achieves a significantly higher welfare of 38.0. This high-lights the effectiveness of its regularization-driven approach in uncovering higher-welfare equilibria that are inaccessible through immediate or myopic optimization. Welfare plots for this experiment are shown in Fig. 4. We more extensively test our approach in four game vari-ants: two disparate versions of two benchmarks. Harvest 

(also known as Gathering ) (Perolat et al., 2017) is a grid-world sequential social dilemma game where players collect apples that stochastically spawn, each of which gives +1 5Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

reward. After being collected, apples respawn at dedicated locations with probability proportional to the number of surrounding apples at each timestep. The players individ-ually benefit by gathering as many apples as possible, but collectively benefit by leaving sufficient apples to enable respawning. Players may also shoot a laser, firing a beam several spaces ahead of them and removing any hit player from the game for a fixed number of time steps. We test our approach in two Harvest maps, referred to as Harvest-Dense and Harvest-Sparse, designed to be distinct enough to sig-nificantly change underlying game dynamics. We elaborate further in App. C.1. We also test our approach on a 2-player, turn-based, im-perfect information bargaining game, employing a version defined by Lewis et al. (2017). The game (which we refer to as Bargaining ) features a pool of items that players must divide among themselves. Each player has a random, private value function that assigns a non-negative utility value to each item. Players alternate making offers of division until a player accepts or the game reaches a maximum number of iterations. If a player accepts, players receive utility ac-cording to the accepted asset allocations and their respective value functions, discounted by γt where 0 < γ < 1 is a hyperparameter and t is the number of time steps so far. If no agreement is reached by the turn limit, both players receive zero utility. We test our approach in two Bargaining variants (detailed in App. C.2), setting γ to .99 and .95 . Dis-count factor differences drastically modify game dynamics, so experiments in both settings are essential for a thorough evaluation of Ex 2PSRO. 

5.2. Implementation and Reproducibility 

We build on an implementation of PSRO in an existing codebase, OpenSpiel, provided by Deepmind (Lanctot et al., 2019). Our experiments use an MSS called regularized replicator dynamics (RRD) (Wang & Wellman, 2023), cho-sen for its simplicity and strong empirical performance. RRD has a regret threshold parameter λ that determines the regret at which RD terminates, yielding a λ-Nash equi-librium. λ is linearly annealed across all PSRO iterations. When λ = 0 , RRD reduces to RD. We compare Ex 2PSRO to vanilla PSRO, a SOTA game-solving framework. For Ex 2PSRO, we performed a grid search over λ and βinit , keeping Sβ = 25 constant, where each parameter setting’s welfare is averaged over 5 trials. Then, we select the parameter setting ( λ, βinit ) with the highest welfare and provide it an additional 5 trials, totaling 10 trials for the final result. Vanilla PSRO is tuned over λ,where we immediately run 10 trials for each λ candidate and report data from the highest-performing parameter setting. Due to computational limitations (App. G), Ex 2PSRO regret values are averaged over 5 trials, while all other settings are averaged over 10. Details on hyperparameters, tuning, and implementation are provided in Apps. A.1, B, C.1, and C.2. 

5.3. Varying Exploration Policy 

We also conduct experiments varying Ex 2PSRO’s explo-ration policy to analyze its dependence on the target behav-ior it regularizes towards. Table 4 in App. A.1 summarizes the four tested exploration policy alternatives. Uniform sets πi 

> ex

to a policy that selects actions uniformly for all states. MinWelfare and MaxWelfare use BC to train πi 

> ex

on datasets generated by trajectory criteria prioritizing low and high welfare, respectively, and disregarding return distribu-tion among players. PrevBR sets πi 

> ex

to the most recently added strategy. From this point forward, we refer to this suite of ablations over πi 

> ex

as ”Ablation-πex ” experiments. All Ablation-πex experiments use the same regret threshold 

λ and initial regularization βinit as tuned Ex 2PSRO, simi-larly fixing Sβ = 25 . This experiment isolates and measures to what extent Ex 2PSRO’s performance depends on regu-larization choice versus regularization strength. Ablations over βinit and λ are provided in App. H.2. 

5.4. Equilibrium Welfare 

Fig. 5 shows welfare of equilibria returned from tuned ver-sions of vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-πex .Welfare differences should be measured relative to the game’s distribution of available equilibria, though comput-ing this distribution becomes computationally intractable for large games. The bar graph in Fig. 5 uses normalized values to approximate this relative measurement, providing a meaningful representation of the improvements achieved. We also provide significance tests for our welfare results, comparing Ex 2PSRO to vanilla PSRO and Ablation-πex .We use Welch’s t-test to calculate P-values as informed by Colas et al. (2019) for its robustness to false positives compared to non-parametric tests. P-values are not adjusted for multiple hypotheses. Performance in these four benchmarks indicates that Ex 2PSRO tends to increase welfare through strategy explo-ration, yielding welfare improvements over vanilla PSRO with low P-values on all benchmarks tested. Ex 2PSRO also tends to outperform approaches in Ablation-πex with low P-value, noting a few exceptions in the next paragraph. While Ex 2PSRO and Uniform showed comparable perfor-mance in Harvest benchmarks, Ex 2PSRO demonstrated distinct advantages in Bargaining scenarios. Similarly, P-values indicate Ex 2PSRO and MaxWelfare performed simi-larly in Harvest-Sparse. Performance across environments reveals key relationships between game dynamics and reg-ularization. In Ablation-πex , Harvest’s welfare improve-6Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

Algorithm Harvest-Dense Harvest-Sparse Bargaining γ = .99 Bargaining γ = .95 

Ex 2PSRO (Ours) 150.2 ± 7.9 | N/A 129.0 ± 7.5 | N/A 12.86 ± 0.26 | N/A 14.02 ± 0.22 | N/A Vanilla 119 .6 ± 3.4 | p < . 01 108 .6 ± 8.9 | p < . 01 12 .50 ± 0.55 | p = .04 13 .76 ± 0.34 | p = .03 

Uniform 146 .0 ± 8.3 | p = .13 126 .8 ± 6.3 | p = .24 12 .49 ± 0.33 | p = .01 13 .72 ± 0.34 | p = .02 

MinWelfare 143 .5 ± 9.5 | p = .05 119 .9 ± 10 .1 | p = .02 12 .63 ± 0.31 | p = .05 13 .38 ± 0.73 | p = .01 

MaxWelfare 142 .0 ± 6.1 | p = .01 127 .4 ± 7.6 | p = .32 12 .13 ± 0.37 | p < . 01 13 .83 ± 0.48 | p = .08 

PrevBR 128 .2 ± 4.3 | p < . 01 123 .4 ± 7.3 | p = .05 12 .53 ± 0.33 | p = .01 13 .56 ± 0.39 | p < . 01 

Figure 5. Welfare of equilibria found by vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-πex with significance test results. These tests alternatively hypothesize whether Ex 2PSRO yields higher welfare equilibria than vanilla PSRO and Ablation-πex . Bolded values in the table indicate each environment’s highest welfare-yielding approach. Welfare is averaged over 10 trials with tuned hyperparameters ( λ, βinit ). Bar graph axis bounds are scaled to display the middle 68% of welfare found across all trials (185 per game), discussed in App. D. This is intended to provide a normalized view of observed differences, further discussed in §5.4 and App. D. Error bars are omitted for clarity. 

Table 1. Combining Ex 2PSRO with GRO. P-Values of Ex 2PSRO and GRO are measured with respect to Vanilla. P-Values of GRO+Ex 2PSRO are measured with respect to GRO. Algorithm Harvest-Dense Harvest-Sparse Bargaining γ = .99 Bargaining γ = .95 

Vanilla 119.6 ± 3.4 108.6 ± 8.9 12.50 ± .55 13.76 ± .34 GRO 134.6 ± 9.1 115.2 ± 11.0 12.99 ± .33 15.07 ± .10 Ex 2PSRO (Ours) 150.2 ± 7.9 129.0 ± 7.5 12.86 ± .26 14.02 ± .22 GRO + Ex 2PSRO (Ours) 151.0 ± 6.2 | p < . 01 122.3 ± 9.5 | p = .07 13.49 ± .39 | p < . 01 15.24 ± .08 | p < . 01 

ments naturally emerge from any regularization that re-duces immediate apple collection, allowing more apples to spawn. Shown with detailed significance tests in App. D, all Ablation-πex variants achieved improvements over vanilla PSRO in Harvest with low P-values. Ex 2PSRO particu-larly shines in Bargaining, where achieving high-welfare behaviors requires navigating more nuanced and complex interactions. Fig. 6 demonstrates Ex 2PSRO’s ability to discover high-welfare solutions more rapidly than other tested approaches. While Uniform exploration achieves quick initial gains in Harvest, its progress plateaus early. MinWelfare shows swift improvements in Bargaining γ = .99 but gradual in Harvest. MaxWelfare welfare trends vary widely while Pre-vBR’s welfare increases slowest within Ablation-πex . These results underscore a key strength of Ex 2PSRO: its strong performance (in its consistency, speed, and magnitude of welfare increases) can be attributed to both the presence and deliberate choice of regularization. Additional analysis and data for hyperparameter searches over λ and βinit are provided in Apps. H, H.2, and Table 8, while ablation experiments varying βinit or λ are detailed in App. H.2. Ex 2PSRO’s tuning was conservative, potentially missing stronger parameter settings, whereas vanilla PSRO underwent exhaustive tuning, and results reflect its highest-welfare configuration. 

5.5. Combining with Generalized Response Objectives 

In principle, any PSRO variant can incorporate Ex 2PSRO by including the regularization term (Eq. 5) in its response objective. We demonstrate Ex 2PSRO’s composability by combining it with another approach addressing high-welfare equilibrium selection: Generalized Response Objectives (GRO) (Wang & Wellman, 2024). We highlight that GRO is not considered a competing approach but one whose per-formance can be bolstered and amplified by Ex 2PSRO. Experiments augmenting vanilla PSRO and GRO with Ex 2PSRO are shown in Table 1. With low P-values, the 7Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning     

> Figure 6. Welfare plots for vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-
> πex .We include error bars for only vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and the top performer in Ablation-πex for each game for clarity. App. H has additional plots.

data supports that combining Ex 2PSRO with GRO tends to find higher welfare equilibria than GRO alone. Compared to tested approaches, GRO+Ex 2PSRO tends to find the highest welfare equilibria, suggesting that the combination ampli-fies welfare improvements. An exception is Harvest-Sparse, where Ex 2PSRO achieved the highest welfare. Note that we do not compare GRO and Ex 2PSRO directly nor tune GRO-specific parameters. Instead, these experiments sup-port Ex 2PSRO’s flexibility and composability with different PSRO variants to improve welfare potential. App. A.1 pro-vides additional details on hyperparameters and procedures. 

5.6. Regret × Welfare Analysis 

The regret and welfare of final profiles discovered are shown in Fig. 7, where square markers indicate the averaged perfor-mance of a particular algorithm. In Bargaining γ = .99 and Harvest-Sparse, Ex 2PSRO dominates all tested approaches. While Ex 2PSRO generally tends to find high-welfare solu-tions with lower regret, Uniform and PrevBR tend to find slightly lower regret profiles than Ex 2PSRO in Bargaining 

γ = .95 , In Harvest-Dense, MaxWelfare finds lower regret profiles than Ex 2PSRO. Small positive correlations between regret and welfare in Harvest could reflect the game structure of social dilemmas, where high-welfare profiles tend to have high-value strategic deviations. In Bargaining, there is a negative correlation between the two metrics, suggesting relative stability of high-welfare solutions found. Next, we compare and analyze regret trends of intermedi-ate profiles of all approaches. Details on true game regret  

> Figure 7. Final regret and welfare of output solutions across ap-proaches. Circles and squares represent individual trials and aver-aged performance within a specified approach, respectively.

approximations are provided in App. G. Trends in Fig. 8 and App. H indicate that Ex 2PSRO appropriately generates approximate equilibria in all benchmarks. We note that all regret trends approach equilibria as shown by the untrun-cated plots (App. H) but Fig. 8 enlarges some of the last few iterations’ datapoints for clarity. Ex 2PSRO tends to find lower regret solutions faster than vanilla PSRO, indicating a link between convergence and regularization. Relative to Ablation-πex experiments, Ex 2PSRO is consistently among the top performers in con-vergence speed and final solution regret. These results sug-gest Ex 2PSRO’s presence and choice of regularization to-gether provide a mechanism to improve convergence while encouraging the discovery of solutions with higher welfare and, possibly, lower regret. We highlight that Ex 2PSRO’s true regret estimation was more thorough than other ap-8Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning     

> Figure 8. Regret plots for vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-
> πex .We include error bars for only vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and the top performer in Ablation-πex for clarity. Harvest plots observe trends in later iterations. App. H has additional plots.

proaches (App. G), meaning vanilla and Ablation-πex so-lutions are more likely to have even higher true regret than reported. In summary, regret trends favor Ex 2PSRO despite being given a disadvantage in terms of its regret evaluation. Additional regret trends and ablations are provided in Apps. H and H.2. 

# 6. Conclusions 

We investigated the possibility of steering MARL game-solving toward preferred equilibria, particularly those with higher welfare. Toward this end, we introduce the concept of exploration policies . To construct these exploration poli-cies, Ex 2PSRO filters already-present simulation traces for high-welfare yielding behavior and applies behavior cloning to the filtered data. Then, Ex 2PSRO uses these policies to regularize best-response computations towards promis-ing behavior within the PSRO framework. Notably, since Ex 2PSRO does not require any additional simulations rel-ative to PSRO, it has shown to be a simple yet effective extension to the current SOTA. We tested our approach in two benchmark environments: a sequential social dilemma game and a game of bargaining over resource division. Our experiments show that Ex 2PSRO tends to improve equi-librium welfare across all benchmarks. By varying the explo-ration policy, we show that Ex 2PSRO’s performance hinges not only on its added regularization but also its choice of regularizing behavior. In our experiments, Ex 2PSRO most consistently discovers lower-regret, higher-welfare solutions quicker than its vanilla counterpart and other exploration policy alternatives. These findings suggest that Ex 2PSRO provides a simple and effective mechanism to guide strategy exploration in service of high-welfare equilibrium selec-tion. Experiments combining Ex 2PSRO and Generalized Response Objectives support its composability with other PSRO-adjacent approaches to improve welfare. Lastly, ex-periments illuminate how a game’s inherent structure may influence which regularization choices are beneficial or detri-mental to performance. 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# References 

Bakhtin, A., Wu, D. J., Lerer, A., Gray, J., Jacob, A. P., Farina, G., Miller, A. H., and Brown, N. Mastering the game of no-press Diplomacy via human-regularized rein-forcement learning and planning. In 11th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Balduzzi, D., Garnelo, M., Bachrach, Y., Czarnecki, W., Perolat, J., Jaderberg, M., and Graepel, T. Open-ended learning in symmetric zero-sum games. In 36th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 434–443, 2019. Bighashdel, A., Wang, Y., McAleer, S., Savani, R., and Oliehoek, F. A. Policy space response oracles: A sur-vey. In 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 7951–7961, 2024. Cheng, R., Verma, A., Orosz, G., Chaudhuri, S., Yue, Y., and Burdick, J. Control regularization for reduced variance reinforcement learning. In 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1141–1150, 2019. Christodoulou, P. Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07207 , 2019. Colas, C., Sigaud, O., and Oudeyer, P.-Y. A hitchhiker’s guide to statistical comparisons of reinforcement learning algorithms. In ICLR-2019 Workshop on Reproducibility in Machine Learning , 2019. Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha, S., Tan, J., Kumar, V., Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P., et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905 , 2018. Jordan, P. R., Schvartzman, L. J., and Wellman, M. P. Strat-egy exploration in empirical games. In 9th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Sys-tems , pp. 1131–1138, 2010. 9Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

Kostrikov, I., Fergus, R., Tompson, J., and Nachum, O. Offline reinforcement learning with Fisher divergence critic regularization. In 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5774–5783, 2021. Lanctot, M., Zambaldi, V., Gruslys, A., Lazaridou, A., Tuyls, K., P ´erolat, J., Silver, D., and Graepel, T. A uni-fied game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement learning. In 31st Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , pp. 4190–4203, 2017. Lanctot, M., Lockhart, E., Lespiau, J.-B., Zambaldi, V., Upadhyay, S., P ´erolat, J., Srinivasan, S., Timbers, F., Tuyls, K., Omidshafiei, S., et al. Openspiel: A frame-work for reinforcement learning in games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09453 , 2019. Lewis, M., Yarats, D., Dauphin, Y. N., Parikh, D., and Batra, D. Deal or no deal? End-to-end learning for negotiation dialogues. In 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 2443–2453, 2017. Liu, Z., Yu, C., Yang, Y., Wu, Z., Li, Y., et al. A unified diversity measure for multiagent reinforcement learning. In 36th Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , pp. 10339–10352, 2022. Lowe, R., Wu, Y. I., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mor-datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In 31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 6382–6393, 2017. McMahan, H. B., Gordon, G. J., and Blum, A. Planning in the presence of cost functions controlled by an adversary. In 20th International Conference on Machine Learning ,pp. 536–543, 2003. Oh, J., Guo, Y., Singh, S., and Lee, H. Self-imitation learn-ing. In 35th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pp. 3878–3887, 2018. Parker-Holder, J., Pacchiano, A., Choromanski, K. M., and Roberts, S. J. Effective diversity in population based rein-forcement learning. In 34th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 18050–18062, 2020. Perez-Nieves, N., Yang, Y., Slumbers, O., Mguni, D. H., Wen, Y., and Wang, J. Modelling behavioural diversity for learning in open-ended games. In 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8514–8524, 2021. Perolat, J., Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V., Beattie, C., Tuyls, K., and Graepel, T. A multi-agent reinforcement learning model of common-pool resource appropriation. In 31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3646–3655, 2017. P ´erolat, J., Munos, R., Lespiau, J., Omidshafiei, S., Row-land, M., Ortega, P. A., Burch, N., Anthony, T. W., Bal-duzzi, D., Vylder, B. D., Piliouras, G., Lanctot, M., and Tuyls, K. From Poincar ´e recurrence to convergence in imperfect information games: Finding equilibrium via regularization. In 38th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , pp. 8525–8535, 2021. Rashid, T., Samvelyan, M., De Witt, C. S., Farquhar, G., Foerster, J., and Whiteson, S. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(178):1–51, 2020. Roy, J., Barde, P., Harvey, F., Nowrouzezahrai, D., and Pal, C. Promoting coordination through policy regulariza-tion in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In 34th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 15774–15785, 2020. Rudner, T. G. J., Lu, C., Osborne, M. A., Gal, Y., and Teh, Y. On pathologies in KL-regularized reinforcement learning from expert demonstrations. In 35th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 28376– 28389, 2021. Su, K. and Lu, Z. Divergence-regularized multi-agent actor-critic. In 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 20580–20603, 2022. Taylor, P. D. and Jonker, L. B. Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Mathematical Biosciences , 40(1-2): 145–156, 1978. Wang, Y. and Wellman, M. P. Regularization for strategy exploration in empirical game-theoretic analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04928 , 2023. Wang, Y. and Wellman, M. P. Generalized response objectives for strategy exploration in empirical game-theoretic analysis. In 23rd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , pp. 1892– 1900, 2024. Wang, Y., Ma, Q., and Wellman, M. P. Evaluating strat-egy exploration in empirical game-theoretic analysis. In 

21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , pp. 1346–1354, 2022. Wellman, M. P., Tuyls, K., and Greenwald, A. Empirical game-theoretic analysis: A survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 82:503–562, 2025. Wu, Y., Tucker, G., and Nachum, O. Behavior regu-larized offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11361 , 2019. 10 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

Xu, H., Zhan, X., Li, J., and Yin, H. Offline reinforcement learning with soft behavior regularization. In NeurIPS-21 Workshop on Offline Reinforcement Learning , 2021. Zhou, H., Lin, Z., Li, J., Ye, D., Fu, Q., and Yang, W. Revisiting discrete soft actor-critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10081 , 2022. 11 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

# A. Hyperparameters 

All Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) parameters considered and chosen for each environment are shown in Table 2. The top section lists parameters held fixed while the bottom lists parameters included in the parameter search. These chosen hyperparameters were common across vanilla PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-πex . 

> Table 2. Soft-Actor Critic Parameter Search

Parameter Candidates Harvest Bargaining Network Depth [2] 2 2Activation [ReLU] ReLU ReLU Discount Factor [.99] .99 .99 Gradient Steps per Update [1] 1 1BC Epochs [50] 50 50 BC Learning Rate [3e-4] 3e-4 3e-4 BC Batch Size [256] 256 256 BC Network Depth [2] 2 2BC Network Width [Match Network Width] 50 100 BC Entropy Threshold None .2 .8 Max Trajectory Buffer Size None 1000 100,000 Entropy Temperature ( α) [0, 1e-3, 3e-3, 1e-2, 3e-2, 1e-1] 3e-2 1e-1 Value Epsilon Clip ( ϵv ) [.2 .5 1.0 2.0] .2 .2 Update Every ( P ) [1, 2, 5, 10] 2 1Number of Training Steps ( S) [100K, 500K, 1M 2M 3M 4M] 2M 100K Policy Learning Rate ( λp) [3e-5, 1e-4, 3e-4] 3e-5 3e-5 Value Learning Rate ( λv ) [3e-5, 1e-4, 3e-4] 1e-4 3e-4 Max Buffer Size ( B) [50K 100K 200K 500K] 100K 50K Network Width ( W ) [50 100 250] 50 100 Batch Size ( b) [32, 64] 64 64 We divided the parameter search for SAC hyperparameters into three phases, each of which advanced a subset of parameters to the next. The first parameter search was over high-priority parameters that we believed would highly influence performance. The second search was over lower-priority parameters that we believed were important when fine-tuning policies. The evaluation of a policy in rounds 1 and 2 was dictated by the average final policy returns across 3 trials when responding to a uniform action policy. In round 3, we compared performance between the strongest configurations determined from the previous two rounds, averaging across 5 trials responding to a uniform mixture of policies. The policy mixture was generated by five iterations of PSRO using SAC parameters from one of the parameter candidates in round 3. If parameter configurations resulted in similar performance, configurations with less computational cost were favored. These details are summarized in Table 3.  

> Table 3. Hyperparameter Tuning Procedure Summary

Round Parameters Trials Response Target 1 α, ϵv , P , S 3 πθ = U (A)

2 λp, λv , B, W , b 3 πθ = U (A)

3 All finalists 5 σ = U (π1 

> θ

, . . . , π 5 

> θ

)

Table 2 also includes some parameters for Ex 2PSRO, specifically behavior cloning parameters and trajectory buffer size. These parameters were not included in the search, the latter of which was chosen based on initial empirical results. Future work could be dedicated to determining how trajectory buffer size affects Ex 2PSRO’s performance. In Table 5, we show the PSRO and Ex 2PSRO regularization-related hyperparameters used to generate the welfare values in Fig. 5, where the candidate hyperparameters search over are shown in Tables 8. The number of steps to anneal exploration regularization Sβ was held fixed at 25. The Ex 2PSRO parameter search was conducted over two parameters: RRD 12 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

regularization λ and initial exploration regularization βinit . Ex 2PSRO parameters were selected by conducting 5 trials for each parameter configuration. For each environment, the setting yielding equilibria with the highest welfare was chosen and given an additional 5 trials to produce the results in Fig. 5. Vanilla PSRO was tuned across only λ as it does not include exploration regularization. Each λ was given 10 trials and we immediately report data from the best-performing parameter setting in Fig. 5. 

A.1. Generalized Response Objectives 

GRO optimizes a modified response objective at each iteration of PSRO. Our experiments optimized social welfare, where the resultant policy optimizes the following, with slight notation changes: 

πiθ ≈ arg max 

> πθ

Eπθ |iTX

> t=1

(αr pt + (1 − α)r−pt ) = arg max 

> πθ

JGRO (θ, α ),

where superscript p and −p indicate rewards assigned to player p and all others except p, respectively, and α is a hyper-parameter. We selected α = .8 as justified by the original work (Wang & Wellman, 2024). When combining GRO and Ex 2PSRO, behavior regularization was also applied, meaning the aggregate optimization is the following: 

πiθ ≈ arg max 

> πθ

(JGRO (θ, α ) − βiRi(θ)) 

Experiments combining GRO and Ex 2PSRO were not tuned across hyperparameters. Ex 2PSRO’s βinit was fixed to .01 and 

λ was fixed to .5 and 5 in both Bargaining and Harvest variants, respectively.  

> Table 4. Ex 2PSRO vs. Ablation-πex

Name Criterion Exploration Policy Ex 2PSRO Eq. 2 Eq. 3 Ablation-πex 

Uniform N/A U( A)MinWelfare − P 

> p

V pj Eq. 3 MaxWelfare P 

> p

V pj Eq. 3 PrevBR N/A πi−1 

> θ
> Table 5. Vanilla PSRO and Ex 2PSRO Parameter Summary

Game Parameter PSRO Ex 2PSRO Harvest-Dense RRD ( λ) 10 5

βinit - 1e-2 Harvest-Sparse RRD ( λ) 2 5

βinit - 1e-2 Bargaining γ = .99 RRD ( λ) .1 .2 

βinit - 3e-4 Bargaining γ = .95 RRD ( λ) .5 .5 

βinit - 1e-2 

# B. Behavior Cloning 

Exploration policies πi 

> ex

at each iteration are trained using behavior cloning (BC) on a trajectory buffer B that consists of trajectories maximizing a criterion C(τj ) as noted in Eq. 2. The training of exploration policy πi 

> ex

is be executed 13 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

immediately before training responses πiθ at each iteration i.The full behavior cloning algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2, where we train a multilayer perceptron (ReLU activations) with a softmax output layer using cross-entropy loss. Batch sizes, number of epochs, size of trajectory buffer B, and learning rates are enumerated in Table 2. We insert an early stopping criterion (called ”BC Entropy Threshold” in Table 2) to avoid divide-by-near-zero errors when calculating the regularization term in Equation 5. 

Algorithm 2 Create Exploration Policy with Behavior Cloning 

Inputs : Trajectory data B, Epochs E, Minibatch size M , learning rate α, model shape S

Outputs : Exploration policy πi 

> ex

parameterized by θi 

> ex
> 1:

Initialize deep model πi 

> ex

of shape S and parameters θi 

> ex
> 2:

Create dataloader D using data B of minibatch size M 

> 3:

for E epochs do  

> 4:

for each minibatch (ok, a k) in D do  

> 5:

J(θi 

> ex

) = CE (πi 

> ex

(ok), a k) 

> 6:

θi 

> ex

= θi 

> ex

− α∇J(θi 

> ex

) 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Shuffle and rebatch dataloader D 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return πi

> ex

# C. Environment Details 

C.1. Harvest Details 

Each space in the Harvest (Perolat et al., 2017) grid-world is characterized by one of four states: empty, wall, apple, or a player. Apples are only able to reside in dedicated locations. Players initially spawn randomly in one of the four corners. The grid worlds are shown in Fig. 9. A player’s observation is defined by their position and orientation. In this implementation, agents observe a rectangular viewing box of 7 spaces forward and 3 to the left and right, both of which include their position. The vectorized state input to a policy neural network πθ is created by unraveling the viewing box into a length 21 tensor, creating 4 indicator tensors for each of the possible space states (empty, wall, apple, player). These tensors are then concatenated to create an aggregate length 84 tensor. The player tensor has a value of -1 to refer to itself, 1 for other players, and 0 for spaces without other players. At each time step, players take actions simultaneously, where each can take one of eight actions: {left, right, forward, backward, turn clockwise, turn counter-clockwise, laser, no operation }. The first four change the player’s location by moving relative to their orientation. The next two modify their orientation. The ”laser” action fires a beam that spans the player’s viewing box (3x7) and removes hit players from the game for 25 time steps. If an apple spawn location is empty (no player and no apple), an apple respawns with probability proportional to the number of apples within 2 units of Euclidean distance. Table 6 summarizes these respawn probabilities. An episode terminates when either there are no apples on the map or 1000 time steps are reached. We construct two variants of the Harvest game, which we term Harvest-Dense and Harvest-Sparse . The former’s map is densely populated with apples and has initial spawn points that are close to the players’ spawn points. The latter’s map consists of a central trove of apples, forcing players to interact with each other in the middle. Harvest-Sparse can be considered a more challenging variant than Harvest-Dense, as the central allocation and decreased presence of apples make coordination more important for high welfare.  

> Table 6. Harvest Respawn Probabilities

Apples in Vicinity (2 units) 0 1 2 ≥ 3

Respawn Probability 0.000 .005 .020 .050 14 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning  

> Figure 9. Diagrams of the Harvest Sparse and Harvest Dense environments. Blue and green tiles indicate where players and apples can spawn, respectively. Gray tiles are walls and yellow tiles are empty.

C.2. Bargaining Details 

The objective in Bargaining (Lewis et al., 2017) is for players to divide up the items so that all items are owned by one of the 2 players. Each player’s random, private value function (assigns a non-negative utility value to each of the items) is constrained such that: (1) the sum of the utility values of all items is the same for both players (i.e., the individual values per item may be different between users but the sum of the items’ utilities is the same for both players); (2) each item has a non-zero value for at least one user; and (3) some items have a non-zero value for both users. The game starts by having one player offer a certain division of assets. 4 The other player can either accept the offer or decline and present a counteroffer. This process continues until all assets have been divided or a turn limit has been reached. Both players receive zero utility if no agreement is reached by the turn limit. In our implementation, the total turn limit is 10, which includes moves by both players. Received utilities are discounted after each iteration by γ. Smaller γ leads players to strategize more myopically, focusing on shorter-term gains rather than long-term. This changes game dynamics dramatically as players may prioritize making deals in less time-steps at the cost of a potentially higher-welfare yielding division of assets. Our implementation sets γ = .99 and γ = .95 . This prevents players from forcing ultimatums at the last iteration, a relatively degenerate version of the game. We adapt an implementation provided by OpenSpiel to establish symmetry between players by having players sample from the same pool of valuations and determining the starting player by a coin flip. We defer further implementation details to Deepmind’s OpenSpiel repository (Lanctot et al., 2019). 

# D. Welfare Distributions and Significance Tests 

We underscore that welfare improvement should be measured relative to the distribution of welfare values of available equilibria in each game. To that end, raw welfare values are not as valuable to examine. For example, suppose a game contains equilibria whose welfare values all lie within [1000, 1005]. While an improvement from 1000 to 1004 may not seem large relative to the raw welfare scores, it is large relative to the distribution of equilibria welfare. Calculation of this actual distribution is infeasible, as it depends on finding all equilibria. To capture the proportions relative to what we can compute, for Fig. 5 we scale the y-axis to cover the inner 68% of points we found across all runs of each game. This is done to encourage analysis with respect to the welfare distribution in the game, but we do not claim that our data samples accurately reflect the distribution of available equilibria. Fig. 7 provides significance tests comparing all pairs of tested approaches listed in Fig. 5. 

> 4The starting player is determined by a coin flip, establishing symmetry in the game.

15 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning  

> Table 7. All P-values use Welch’s t-test, verifying whether the approaches listed in the row outperform those in the column in the listed game benchmark.

Harvest-Dense Vanilla Ex 2PSRO Uniform MinWelfare MaxWelfare PrevBR Vanilla N/A 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 Ex 2PSRO 4e-8 N/A .131 .052 .009 1e-6 Uniform 4e-7 .869 N/A .269 .118 1e-5 MinWelfare 5e-6 .948 .731 N/A .340 2e-4 MaxWelfare 4e-8 .991 .882 .660 N/A 1e-5 PrevBR 6e-5 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 N/A Harvest-Sparse Vanilla Ex 2PSRO Uniform MinWelfare MaxWelfare PrevBR Vanilla N/A 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 Ex 2PSRO 1e-5 N/A .243 .018 .321 .054 Uniform 3e-5 .757 N/A .043 .575 .139 MinWelfare 8e-3 .982 .957 N/A .961 .806 MaxWelfare 4e-5 .679 .425 .039 N/A .123 PrevBR 3e-4 .946 .860 .194 .877 N/A Bargaining γ = .99 

Vanilla Ex 2PSRO Uniform MinWelfare MaxWelfare PrevBR Vanilla N/A .958 .481 .737 .048 .558 Ex 2PSRO .042 N/A .006 .045 1e-4 .012 Uniform .519 .994 N/A .829 .017 .605 MinWelfare .263 .955 .171 N/A .002 .247 MaxWelfare .952 1.00 .983 .998 N/A .990 PrevBR .442 .988 .395 .753 .010 N/A Bargaining γ = .95 

Vanilla Ex 2PSRO Uniform MinWelfare MaxWelfare PrevBR Vanilla N/A .970 .398 .080 .644 .119 Ex 2PSRO .030 N/A .016 .011 .080 .003 Uniform .602 .984 N/A .103 .719 .171 MinWelfare .920 .989 .897 N/A .938 .748 MaxWelfare .356 .862 .281 .062 N/A .092 PrevBR .881 .997 .829 .252 .908 N/A 

# E. Compute Resources 

Experiments were run on the University of Michigan’s research computing cluster. We summarize computational resources allocated for all Harvest and Bargaining variants. Using a CPU, each PSRO, Ex 2PSRO, and Ablation-πex run took anywhere between 2 and 4 days to finish as there were a total of 30 RL policies being trained in sequence. Ex 2PSRO variants required roughly 8–12 GB of RAM to support trajectory buffer storage, which could be reduced through code changes allowing disk storage. Vanilla PSRO was run with 5 GB of RAM while Ex 2PSRO and Ablation-πex runs were run with 12–15 GB of RAM. Additional computation was allocated for regret calculations, elaborated in App. G, which took an additional 3–4 days and 5 GB of RAM. For each game variant, experiments included 40 vanilla PSRO runs (tuning across λ), 105 Ex 2PSRO runs (100 for tuning across ( λ, βinit ), 5 for the finalist) and 40 Ablation-πex runs (10 for each variant), totaling 185 runs per game. With 4 benchmarks, a total of 740 trials were conducted throughout, each requiring the aforementioned compute. 16 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

# F. Trajectory Buffer Sharing 

A key part of the Ex 2PSRO algorithm is the trajectory buffer, which leverages simulation data generated during the PSRO process to guide the algorithm towards discovering higher-welfare equilibrium. This approach attributes additional value to trajectory data that would otherwise be discarded in vanilla PSRO after response training. Here, we discuss the assumption that trajectories are shared across players. We emphasize that a shared trajectory buffer does not change the underlying nature of the game. Crucially, Ex 2PSRO still enforces that players only have access to their own information when making decisions. Ex 2PSRO’s design is to be interpreted from the perspective of a game analyst: Ex 2PSRO is used to discover equilibria, not reflect how players would develop or change their strategies over time to arrive at an equilibrium. More concretely, access to a shared trajectory buffer is used to aid algorithmic discovery of higher-welfare equilibria, not advocating that players in the real world would have access to such a buffer for strategy generation. 

# G. Estimating True Regret 

Let ΠT and Π′ 

> T

be the un-regularized and regularized sets of strategies, respectively, at the end of a PSRO trial where 

T is the total number of PSRO iterations. Note that for vanilla PSRO, Π′ 

> T

= ∅ and for Ex 2PSRO, |ΠT | = T − Sβ and 

|Π′ 

> T

| = Sβ . To ensure Ex 2PSRO was rigorously evaluated, we augment Ex 2PSRO’s ΠT after each full run by training un-regularized best responses π∗iθ for each profile σi for which a regularized response πiθ ∈ Π′ 

> T

was created. We estimate the true game regret as the max deviation gain from the iteration’s profile where we consider strategies in ΠT ∪ Π′ 

> T

and lower-bound the estimate by 0: 

Regret (σi) = max  

> π∈ΠT∪Π′
> T

max( u(π, σ i

> −1

) − u(σi), 0) . (8) All utilities are estimated empirically using a fixed number of simulations. We note that for Ex 2PSRO, |ΠT ∪ Π′ 

> T

|= T + Sβ

while for vanilla PSRO, |ΠT ∪ Π′ 

> T

|= T . Ex 2PSRO’s regret evaluation set includes T non-regularized responses (just like vanilla PSRO) but contains an additional Sβ regularized responses. This discrepancy makes Ex 2PSRO’s regret calculations more thorough than that of vanilla PSRO, meaning vanilla PSRO’s regret has a higher chance of being underestimated than Ex 2PSRO. In other words, vanilla PSRO is given an “advantage” in terms of regret calculations. Despite this, regret values for Ex 2PSRO are equal to, arguably lower than, vanilla PSRO’s in all benchmarks shown in §5.6. Trials in Ablation-πex 

were not given non-regularized responses, meaning ΠT = ∅ and reported regret for Ablation-πex trials similarly have higher chances of being underestimated. 

# H. Additional Results  

> Figure 10. Non-truncated version of regret trends for Harvest-Sparse and Harvest-Dense.

17 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

H.1. Regret and Welfare 

We provide un-truncated versions of the plots provided in the main paper in Fig. 10. Table 8 summarizes welfare metrics in Harvest and Bargaining during hyperparameter tuning. Underlined entries correspond to metrics that are averaged over 10 trials. All other entries are averaged over 5. Bolded metrics indicate the strongest-performing configuration given λ. These tables correspond to the hyperparameter tuning mentioned in Table 5. Vanilla PSRO metrics are each averaged over 10 trials and the final metrics correspond to the best-performing vanilla PSRO parameter configuration. Ex 2PSRO metrics are averaged over 5 trials except for the chosen hyperparameter configuration, which is then given 5 additional trials for a total of 10. We reiterate that this parameter tuning procedure is conservative, as Ex 2PSRO’s tuning process is susceptible to high variance and may neglect to choose a parameter setting that would have yielded even stronger performance.  

> Table 8. Welfare Tuning

Harvest-Sparse 

βinit λ = 0 λ = 2 λ = 5 λ = 10 1e-4 102 .36 ± 7.53 96 .85 ± 6.21 108 .58 ± 6.77 101 .27 ± 9.11 

3e-4 104 .14 ± 12 .45 112 .39 ± 4.11 107 .54 ± 8.47 118 .39 ± 5.37 

1e-3 117.81 ± 13.90 110 .35 ± 12 .64 121 .07 ± 2.49 113 .00 ± 10 .98 

3e-3 116 .35 ± 4.28 112 .18 ± 6.73 116 .94 ± 9.19 115 .68 ± 4.60 

1e-2 113 .77 ± 6.99 122.18 ± 3.42 129.02 ± 7.54 120.84 ± 10.44 

Vanilla 103 .80 ± 5.85 108 .57 ± 8.95 106 .48 ± 8.83 106 .60 ± 4.88 

Harvest-Dense 1e-4 117 .88 ± 4.89 117 .12 ± 2.84 126 .91 ± 2.76 121 .52 ± 5.57 

3e-4 123 .05 ± 5.74 121 .30 ± 5.66 125 .46 ± 8.52 126 .10 ± 7.39 

1e-3 120 .96 ± 3.43 127 .27 ± 4.06 127 .15 ± 2.70 125 .97 ± 3.13 

3e-3 134 .73 ± 4.90 136 .28 ± 12 .36 138 .82 ± 6.03 140.74 ± 8.09 

1e-2 141.46 ± 6.30 137.81 ± 4.14 150.22 ± 7.86 137 .61 ± 3.28 

Vanilla 118 .98 ± 5.67 117 .38 ± 2.30 118 .36 ± 7.81 119 .57 ± 3.35 

Bargaining γ = .99 

βinit λ = 0 λ = .1 λ = .2 λ = .5 1e-4 12 .37 ± 0.10 12 .23 ± 0.58 12 .57 ± 0.12 12 .67 ± 0.56 

3e-4 12 .24 ± 0.28 11 .82 ± 0.48 12.86 ± 0.26 12 .48 ± 0.16 

1e-3 12 .15 ± 0.64 12 .34 ± 0.24 12 .75 ± 0.15 12 .33 ± 0.42 

3e-3 12 .27 ± 0.23 12 .63 ± 0.36 12 .63 ± 0.13 12.72 ± 0.36 

1e-2 12.55 ± 0.24 12.66 ± 0.13 12 .55 ± 0.34 12 .66 ± 0.20 

Vanilla 11 .95 ± 0.66 12 .50 ± 0.55 12 .34 ± 0.28 12 .40 ± 0.21 

Bargaining γ = .95 1e-4 12 .54 ± 0.22 12 .83 ± 0.42 13 .41 ± 0.28 13 .82 ± 0.20 

3e-4 13 .14 ± 0.37 13 .31 ± 0.41 12 .28 ± 1.08 13 .74 ± 0.14 

1e-3 12 .83 ± 0.16 13 .46 ± 0.36 13 .22 ± 0.29 12 .74 ± 0.71 

3e-3 12 .51 ± 1.05 13.76 ± 0.14 13 .49 ± 0.32 13 .32 ± 0.29 

1e-2 13.23 ± 0.12 12 .78 ± 0.23 13.82 ± 0.37 14.02 ± 0.22 

Vanilla 12 .85 ± 0.38 12 .80 ± 0.39 13 .25 ± 0.56 13 .76 ± 0.34 

H.2. Hyperparameter Ablation 

We next analyze the effect of βinit and λ on Ex 2PSRO’s performance. We conduct ablation tests in Bargaining γ = .99 and Harvest-Sparse. We fix one of the parameters and vary the other for both environments. Bargaining γ = .99 fixes λ = .2

and βinit = 3e-4 while Harvest-Sparse fixes λ = 5 and βinit = 1e-2. Fig. 11 displays the regret and welfare trends over iterations, where we vary either λ or βinit .18 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

In Harvest-Sparse, results indicate that increased regularization correlates with higher-welfare equilibria. In particular, greater regularization seems to reduce how steeply welfare initially dips, a characteristic common across all trials. We posit that this arises because higher regularization encourages more coordinated abstinence from over-harvesting apples. This relationship between regularization and welfare supports that Ex 2PSRO, through βinit , has some control over the welfare of its solutions, an equilibrium selection mechanism not previously available in vanilla PSRO. In Bargaining γ = .99 ,relationships between regret, welfare, and tested parameters are relatively unclear. We leave it to future work to ascertain any correlations between these values. 19 Explicit Exploration for High-Welfare Equilibria in Game-Theoretic Multiagent Reinforcement Learning 

Figure 11. Ablation tests for Ex 2PSRO in Harvest Sparse and Bargaining γ = .99 , varying λ or βinit and fixing the other parameter. We analyze both welfare and regret trends over iterations, displaying the data from all 30 iterations. We omit standard deviation lines for clarity. 

20