Title: Strategy-Following Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning Considering Control Strategies Provided to Other Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18719v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 00:31:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Strategy-Following Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning Considering Control Strategies Provided to Other Agents 

Yamato Takahagi ∗, Gentoku Nakasone ∗, Yoshinari Motokawa ∗ and Toshiharu Sugawara †

Department of Computer Science and Communications Engineering Waseda University , Tokyo 1698555, Japan Email: ∗{y.takahagi,g.nakasone,y.motokawa }@isl.cs.waseda.ac.jp, †sugawara@waseda.jp 

Abstract —This study proposes a learning method for multi-agent systems that allows agents to be controlled through human manager instructions after learning and enables uninstructed agents to implicitly complement the overall work based on the actions of other agents. Multi-agent applications using deep learning have shown potential; thus, to achieve extensive social applications, humans should be able to control learned agents using simple methods to respond to environmental and social changes. Even without such changes, learned coordination often does not match the expectations of human managers, making it preferable to control coordination structures to match human intentions. Some studies have aimed to control agent behavior using simple instructions. However, they assumed that instruc-tions are provided to all agents, which is time-consuming and not evident when designing a better cooperation regime. Ideally, specific agents should receive key action instructions, while others should automatically complete the remaining tasks. The proposed method, which extends previous work on controllability in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning, enables uninstructed agents to adaptively complement overlooked tasks and areas. The experimental results show that agents using the proposed method can shift to another cooperative structure and achieve better performance than those using conventional methods. 

Index Terms —Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning, dis-tributed autonomous learning, attention mechanism, controlla-bility 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have led to the widespread use of multiple AI agents. As these agents become more prevalent, their interactions also increase. There-fore, research on multi-agent systems that enable appropriate coordination and conflict avoidance between agents has re-ceived attention. However, the coordination and collaboration structures between agents remain complex and challenging. Recent advancements in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) have resulted in various studies on multi-agent DRL (MADRL) to establish coordinated behavior using environmental data. For example, it has been utilized in autonomous driving [15] and real-time strategic games [14]. They are also utilized to optimize communication among UAVs, ground vehicles, and portable devices [16], [22]. Although MADRL can facilitate the formation of cooper-ative structures, several challenges remain. These include the 

This work is partly supported by KAKENHI 25K03188. 

lazy-agent problem , where agents learn that inaction is advan-tageous because of the effective performance of other agents, and the unaligned coordination structure , where cooperation converges to a local optimum that may not align with the objectives of human managers. Even if the initial cooperative structure is suitable, changes in requirements or environmen-tal conditions may necessitate non-local adjustments to the coordinated behavior. However, MADRL requires extensive training periods even for minor modifications, which makes retraining for each change inefficient. One potential solution is to integrate the controllability of human managers into the learning process, thereby allowing agents to follow their instructions/directions. Several studies have explored the establishment of control-lability within a DRL framework for harmonious machine-human coexistence [19]. For example, research on rein-forcement learning (RL) has focused on controllability en-hancement through linguistic instructions to direct agent be-havior [4], [7]. DRL studies have proposed language-based command methods [1] and approaches such as controllable imitative RL (CIRL) [6], which incorporates controllability into the policy design of DRL agents in autonomous driving. Studies have also explored the control of learned agents using programmed instructions [2], [5], [17], [21]. However, most studies have assumed control of a single agent. Because coor-dinated behavior between agents requires sophisticated analy-sis, these methods cannot simply be extended to MADRL. Motokawa and Sugawara [10] proposed a strategy-following distributed attentional actor architecture after conditional attention (sfDA6-X) to establish controllability in MADRL. As a key feature, sfDA6-X distributes abstract directions from an external manager to agents rather than using detailed programmatic or linguistic commands, and the agents au-tonomously determine behaviors based on policies learned in several directions. Because actions are generated using learned policies, fine-grained instructions are not required, allowing the system to naturally cover the environment cooperatively. The use of explicit directions during learning helps prevent lazy agents. However, as the number of agents increases, providing directions for all agents becomes difficult, potentially causing behaviors that are misaligned with environmental structures. arXiv:2607.18719v1 [cs.MA] 21 Jul 2026 When instructions are given only to certain agents, imbalances may occur, leading to inadequate environmental coverage. Uninstructed agents must act flexibly and autonomously in ways that complement cooperative work by considering direc-tions given to others. To address this issue, we propose a method that enables agents to consider the directions given to others and au-tonomously determine their behaviors, allowing them to com-plement each other without compromising efficiency. Specifi-cally, we propose a learning method by which agents receive aggregated directional information from others, ensuring their independence from the agent numbers. We experimentally demonstrated that our method encourages cooperative behav-ior by considering others’ actions based on directions using the object collection game employed in [10]. We analyzed the resulting agent behaviors to understand the performance of the proposed method. II. R ELATED WORK 

Several studies have aimed to improve agent learning effi-ciency by allowing human instruction during training. Ross et al. [13] proposed a method that involves humans controlling agents in real time, enabling better imitation of rational behavior. Wu et al. [20] improved learning in autonomous driving by allowing humans to correct inappropriate agent actions. Rajeswaran et al. [12] proposed treating human-selected actions as agent actions and updating the policy func-tions based on rewards. Although these approaches enhance learning efficiency, they do not address the control of agent behavior after training. Our study focused on establishing agent controllability after training. Some studies on DRL have focused on the continual con-trollability of agents even after the training phase. Fried et al. [4] realized vision-and-language navigation using embed-ded speaker models and language-conditioned image gener-ation networks . Other studies have demonstrated that agents can learn to follow instructions written in formal languages, enabling them to exhibit behaviors that align with human intentions [2], [5], [17], [21]. However, these studies mainly focused on single-agent settings and did not address multi-agent systems. In contrast, Motokawa et al. [9] proposed sfDA6-X, a method for controlling post-training agents in multi-agent environments using rough strategies from human managers. This approach enables agents to acquire flexible behaviors and form coordinated actions based on human instructions. However, sfDA6-X has a limitation: when strategic directions from humans are biased, agents may act independently without considering the directions provided to other agents, thereby reducing efficiency. Therefore, we aimed to improve agent’s performance by developing a learning method by which each agent considers the strategic directions given to the other agents. This approach seeks to ensure controllability while enabling agents to complement each other efficiently. 

Fig. 1: Experimental environment III. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Decentralized POMDP 

We consider discrete time t (∈ Z+) in units of timestep 

or simply step , where Z+ is the set of positive integers. Let 

I = {1, . . . , N } denote the set of agents. Our framework is based on a decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) [11] for N agents. A Dec-POMDP is represented by a tuple ⟨I , S, {A i}, p T , {ri}, {Ωi}, O, H ⟩,where S is the set of environment states, and Ai is the set of actions available to agent i ∈ I , with the set of joint actions 

A = A1 × · · · × A N . Given the joint action a ∈ A and states 

s, s ′ ∈ S , pT (s′|s, a ) ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the state transition function , and ri(s, a ) ∈ R denotes the reward function for agent i. Each Ωi is the finite set of possible observations for agent i. Given a joint observation o ∈ Ω = Ω 1 × · · · × ΩN ,

O(o|s, a ) represents the conditional observation probability function. H ∈ Z+ denotes the maximum number of steps in the stochastic process. Each agent i ∈ I learns a pol-icy πi to maximize its own discounted cumulative reward 

Ri = PHt=0 γtri(s, a ). Here, 0 ≤ γ < 1 is the discount factor , which determines the present value of future rewards. A higher value of γ indicates that future rewards have a greater influence. 

B. Object Collection Game 

An object collection game in a simple GX × GY grid environment is used for the evaluation. In this game, the agents start moving at time t = 0 from predetermined initial positions (blue nodes). The objects initially spawn in the environment. Agent i selects action ai ∈ A i = {up , down , left , right } at each step. If agent i moves to a node with an object, it collects the object and receives a positive reward, ro > 0. The collected object then disappears, and another spawns elsewhere. If agent 

i collides with a wall or another agent, it receives a negative reward rc < 0. Otherwise, it receives a small negative reward 

rm (≤ 0) as a movement cost. The agents aim to collect objects in designated areas (yellow areas) while avoiding collisions with walls (black nodes) and other agents. 

C. Observation Matrices Based on Local View and Global Position 

The observation of an agent can be expressed using two types of matrices [8]. The first type, called local observation matrices (or local matrices ), is generated from a local visible Fig. 2: Example of destination channels area of size RX ×RY centered on i, where RX and RY are odd integers such that 3 ≤ RX ≤ GX and 3 ≤ RY ≤ GY . The local information is encoded into Nc channels of RX × RY

matrices (a tensor of shape Nc × RX × RY ), representing observable items such as agents (with the agent centered), obstacles, and objects being collected and input into each agent’s network; thus, Nc = N + 2 . The second matrix, called the positional matrix , represents i’s global position in the environment. A GX × GY matrix represents the entire environment, where the element at i’s position is 1 and the others are 0. Agents can obtain their global positions using GPS. 

D. Multi-Head Attention 

The self-attention mechanism [18] calculates the similarity between the vectors in a matrix using the following equation: 

Attention( Q, K, V ) = Softmax( Q · KT

√d )V, 

where Q, K, and V represent the query, key, and value matrices, respectively, and d denotes the dimensionality of the query/key vectors. Furthermore, multi-head attention applies the self-attention mechanism in parallel across h (h ∈ Z+)attention heads and is computed as follows: 

MHA( Q, K, V ) = Concat( head 1, . . . , head h)W O

head l = Attention( Q · W Ql , K · W Kl , V · W Vl ),

where W Ql , W Kl , W Vl , and W O are learnable parameter matrices for head l (1 ≤ ∀ l ≤ h). 

E. Destination Channels 

Here, we describe destination channels (DCs) [10] that di-rect agents to perform actions. DCs are the strategy directions provided to agents as matrices. They do not contain detailed instructions for the agents to follow. A DC is a matrix of size GX × GY with binary values (0 and 1) as elements. Figure 2 shows four examples of DCs in the environment shown in Fig. 1, where the beige regions correspond to the elements filled with 1. During training, the network in each agent receives observation matrices and one DC and learns to obtain a positive reward ri(s, a ) = ro only when collecting an object in the beige region. However, a reward cannot be obtained if an object is collected from another region. By preparing the necessary DC shapes and providing DCs during the training and execution phases, the agent’s behaviors can be controlled with a certain granularity of control to work in desirable areas. 

Fig. 3: Architecture of sfDA6-X 

F. sfDA6-X 

We describe sfDA6-X [10], which forms the basis of our study. sfDA6-X is an extended model based on its predecessor, DA6-X [9]. As shown in Fig. 3, DA6-X consists of three stages: a conditional module (CM), local transformer encoder, and DRL head. The CM recognizes environmental conditions (specified by the positional matrix in the object collection game; agents can learn rules depending on the position), and the local transformer encoder assigns weights to the observed information through an attention mechanism. In sfDA6-X, the CM is extended to receive environmental conditions and strate-gic directions as DCs, thereby enabling model recognition. Using the transformer encoder’s self-attention mechanism in the CM, the model generates a saliency vector representing the elements most attended to during decision-making. This saliency vector is reused in the local transformer encoder and DRL head. The DRL head outputs agent actions based on the input features, corresponding to ”X” in the method name. Assuming the existence of M submodules, the m-th module 

(1 ≤ m ≤ M ) processes the patched conditional state matrix 

xm ∈ RIm×(P 2 

> mNm)

and embeds it using the embedding parameter matrix Econd  

> m

∈ R(P 2 

> mNm)×Cm

, where Im is the length of the m-th conditional state after patching, Pm is the patch size, Nm is the number of channels before patching, and Cm is the dimensionality of the m-th saliency vector. The embeddings are concatenated with the saliency vector 

usal  

> m

∈ RCm and reused from the previous stage. This operation is represented as follows: 

gm, 0 = [ usal  

> m

; x1

> m

Econd  

> m

; x2

> m

Econd  

> m

; . . . ; xIm 

> m

Econd  

> m

] + P cond  

> m

,

where P cond  

> m

∈ R(Im+1) ×Cm denotes the positional embed-ding corresponding to the state-embedding operation in the CM submodules, as shown in Fig. 3. After this operation, the resulting data are fed into the trans-former encoder within the submodule. Letting the transformer encoder be denoted by TEL cond  

> m

, this operation is represented by the following equation: 

gm,l = TEL cond  

> m

(gm,l −1), l = 1 , . . . , L m.Fig. 4: Architecture of sfDA7-X After repeating this process Lm times, the saliency vectors obtained from all submodules ( g01,L 1 , . . . , g 0 

> m,L m

, . . . , g 0 

> M,L M

)are aggregated by vector integration to generate the final saliency vector vsal ∈ RCL of length CL. This operation is expressed as follows: 

vsal = VectorIntegration( g01,L 1 , . . . , g 0 

> m,L m

, . . . , g 0 

> M,L M

).

Through this integration process, the information from all sub-modules is consolidated into a unified feature representation. The generated vsal is then updated and passed to the DRL head as follows: 

h0 = [ φ(vsal ); y1Elocal ; y2Elocal ; . . . ; yIL Elocal ] + P local 

hl = TEL local (hl−1), l = 1 , . . . , L L

Q = DRLHead( h0 

> LL

),

where φ(·) is the projection operation, and v is passed to the local state embedder (Fig. 3). Subsequently, the local observation y ∈ RIL×(P 2L NL) is embedded using the parameter 

EL ∈ R(P 2L NL)×CL . The embedding result is then concatenated with φ(vsal ), where IL is the local observation length after patching, PL is the local patch size, and NL is the number of channels in the patched local observation. Subsequently, the input h0 is passed through the local transformer encoder layers, denoted by TEL local , for LL

iterations ( LL ∈ Z+), and the positional embedding P local ∈

R(IL+1) ×CL is added. Finally, the generated saliency vector 

h0 

> LL

is fed into the DRL head. Therefore, the sfDA6-X model integrates self-attention, enhancing action selection and enabling efficient cooperative exploration. By reusing the saliency vector from the CM, the agent learns policies by considering the environmental condi-tions and strategy directions from the DC, thereby ensuring controllability. IV. P ROPOSED METHOD 

We introduce a method called strategy-following distributed attentional actor architecture after conditional attention aug-

Fig. 5: DCs assigned during training TABLE I: Training hyperparameters            

> Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value Learning rate 1e −3Discount factor γ0.9
> Adam ε1e −8Batch size 32

mented by aggregated DC (sfDA7-X), which is an extension of sfDA6-X. In this method, an agent not only receives its own direction (i.e., DC) but also incorporates an abstracted representation of the DCs assigned to other agents, enabling it to infer their behavior while making its own decisions. For example, even when the agent does not receive explicit instructions (or is instructed with no constraints), it aims to learn a cooperative policy that covers the overall task while minimizing redundancy based on the directions given to other agents. Because the number of other agents is not fixed, we generate an abstracted representation called an aggregated DC 

(ADC) by encoding the DCs assigned to all other agents into a single DC. The generated ADC is fed into the network as an additional input. The ADC is generated as follows. Let the set of all DCs be denoted as D. During training, for each episode, a DC randomly selected from D is assigned to each agent. Therefore, the agents usually have different DCs. In episode e, let the set of all DCs assigned to agents other than i ∈ I be denoted by 

De,i . The ADC assigned to agent i (M ADC  

> i

) is defined as 

M ADC  

> i

= X

> d∈D e,i

d. (1) Notably, the ADC is represented as a single matrix, regardless of the number of agents N . Through this operation, the explo-ration strategy of the agent with respect to its destination is updated in harmony with the exploration areas of other agents and is expected to efficiently collect objects while avoiding redundancy. Fig. 4 shows the architecture of the proposed sfDA7-X model. Note that we assume that agents can obtain the DCs of others during the execution phase; we believe that this is acceptable because DCs are determined and provided by human managers. Unlike sfDA6-X, which only considers the DC assigned to the agent itself, sfDA7-X incorporates the ADC, enabling uninstructed agents to complement overlooked areas. V. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

A. Experimental Settings 

We experimentally evaluated the proposed method using an object collection game in a grid environment E of size 

GX × GY = 49 × 25 , as shown in Fig. 1, where black areas represent walls, blue nodes indicate the initial positions of agents, white areas denote regions without objects, and yellow areas indicate regions where objects can appear. The number of Fig. 6: Learning curve of the average objects collected TABLE II: Performance during training phase         

> Method Reward Objects collected sfDA6-IQN 173.476 183.545 sfDA7-IQN 179.124 190.513 Improvement ratio 3.26% 3.80%

agents was N = 4 . At the start of the episode, each agent was placed at a predetermined position (blue node) and assigned one direction (DC) that was randomly selected from the set D

during training. The experiment was limited to two types of DCs: entire (i.e., agents that can collect objects anywhere) and 

half DCs, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In the proposed method, each agent receives an ADC and DC. The environment maintained 

80 objects, and the collected objects were regenerated at random, as shown by empty yellow nodes. The episode length was H = 200 steps, and the training period was 20 , 000 

episodes ( 4M steps). The baseline was sfDA6-X because the other methods cannot accept DCs. A comparison with other methods that do not employ DCs can be found in [10]. We analyzed objects collected during training and working areas, where agents collected objects during execution when DCs were provided for control, and compared the results with those of the baseline. In the execution phases, we examined the performance when biased DCs that directed agents to collect objects, mainly in a specific area, were provided. Our concern is how agents without specific directions, i.e., agents with entire DCs, can cover other areas in accordance with the game’s meaning. We set ro = 1 , rc = −1, and rm = 0 . The agent’s field of view was set to RX = RY = 7 . We employed the implicit quantile network (IQN) [3] for the DRL heads (denoted by sfDA6-IQN and sfDA7-IQN). The hyperparameters used in training are listed in Table I. The greedy parameter ε was set to 1.0

and decreased to 0.05 with a decay rate of 0.998 .

B. Performance Comparison 1) Learning Speed and Performance: First, we trained the baseline and proposed networks in agents and compared the learning speed and efficiency because additional matrices (ADCs) were fed to the networks in the proposed method, potentially reducing the learning efficiency. The resulting learning curves are presented in Fig. 6, which plots the 1. 

Combination 1 2. 

Combination 2 3. 

Combination 3 4. 

Combination 4 Fig. 7: DC combinations TABLE III: Performance during execution phase         

> Method Reward Objects collected sfDA6-IQN 133.895 135.357 sfDA7-IQN 142.944 146.188 Improvement ratio 6.76% 8.00%

exponential moving average (EMA) of the objects collected in independent experimental runs with three random seeds, where the smoothing factor of the EMA was set to 0.99 . Table II lists the average rewards and numbers of collected objects per episode between 3 M and 4 M steps. 

2) Performance with Biased DCs in Execution Phase: 

We analyzed the performance and controllability of DCs and ADCs during execution by providing combinations of biased DCs. In this experiment, one of the four pattern combinations, as shown in Fig. 7, was selected per experimental run, and each DC in the selected combination was sequentially provided to the agents (totaling 16 cases from combinations of four pat-terns and four agents). These four DC combinations indicate that one agent can collect objects anywhere, while the other three agents are directed to work in the same half of the area. This indicates a biased direction. Our interest lies in how the unrestricted agent in each episode moves to collect objects to compensate for the biased movements of others. 

Agent 0 Agent 1 Agent 2 Agent 3

> (a) Pattern 1

Agent 0 Agent 1 Agent 2 Agent 3

> (b) Pattern 2

Fig. 8: Combinations of DCs (biased) (a) Pattern 1 (b) Pattern 2 

Fig. 9: Numbers of collected objects               

> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (a) sfDA6-IQN
> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (b) sfDA7-IQN

Fig. 10: Object collection locations and counts (Pattern 1)               

> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (a) sfDA6-IQN
> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (b) sfDA7-IQN

Fig. 11: Object collection locations and counts (Pattern 2) The results obtained using the three random seeds are listed in Table III. The proposed method achieved an 8.00% 

improvement in the number of collected objects and a 6.76% 

improvement in the rewards compared with the baseline method. This suggests that the agent without a specific di-rection attempted to collect more objects, considering the movement areas of the other agents based on the DCs provided to them. 

C. Detailed Analysis of Activity Locations and Counts 1) Biased Directions: To validate our proposed method, we analyzed where agents collected objects and the number of objects using both methods. Two experimental runs were selected, and heatmaps were generated to illustrate the results. In the first instance, four DCs called Pattern 1 were provided to the agents, as shown in Fig. 8a, where Agents 1, 2, and 3 were directed to the lower half of the environment, whereas Agent 0 was not directed explicitly. In the second instance, DCs called 

Pattern 2 were provided (Fig. 8b), where Agents 0, 1, and 2 Agent 0 Agent 1 Agent 2 Agent 3Fig. 12: Combinations of DCs (Exp 2) 

Fig. 13: Objects collected (Exp 2) were directed to work in the right half, whereas Agent 3 was not. First, we confirmed the performances of both methods. The number of objects collected by agents with sfDA6-IQN and sfDA7-IQN over time is plotted in Figs. 9a (Pattern 1) and 9b (Pattern 2). These figures indicate that the agents with sfDA7-IQN outperformed those with sfDA6-IQN. Note that although the curves increased or decreased before 50 K steps, these fluctuations were caused by the initial data due to the exponential moving average calculation; therefore, we focused on the values after 100 K steps. Figures 10 and 11 show heatmaps indicating where agents collected objects when Patterns 1 and 2 were provided. In the first case (Fig. 10), Agents 1, 2, and 3 collected objects in the lower-half area with both the sfDA6-IQN and sfDA7-IQN methods by following the DCs. Agent 0 with sfDA6-IQN collected objects without considering the DCs of other agents, redundantly collecting in the lower-left area while ignoring the upper-right area. In contrast, Agent 0 with sfDA7-IQN collected objects mainly in the upper-half area to compensate for the biased DCs provided to the other agents. Looking at the heatmaps for Agents 1, 2, and 3, agents with sfDA7-IQN collected more objects (darker working areas), likely because they considered other agents’ DCs and learned the optimal movement during training. In the second experiment, the agents with sfDA7-IQN collected more objects, as shown in Fig. 11. Agents 0, 1, and 2 with sfDA6-IQN moved around in the right-half area. Simi-larly, Agents 0, 1, and 2 with sfDA7-IQN moved to the right-half area, showing a slightly darker color in Fig. 11. Agent 3with sfDA6-IQN redundantly collected objects throughout the environment. Agent 3 with sfDA7-IQN collected objects mainly in the left-half area to compensate for other agents, thereby increasing the overall efficiency through complemen-tary coordination. 

2) Unbiased Directions: Another experiment was con-ducted using the DC combination pattern shown in Fig. 12. These DCs cover the environment; however, the agents col-lected objects more frequently in the lower half. The number of objects collected over time is presented in Fig. 13. After 

100 K steps, agents with sfDA7-IQN collected approximately 

18 .1% more objects than those with sfDA6-IQN. Heatmaps indicating where agents collected the objects are shown in Fig. 14. Similar to Figs. 10 and 11, Agents 1, 2, and 3 collected objects only in areas directed by DCs, and agents with sfDA7-IQN collected more objects because their heatmaps were darker than those with sfDA6-IQN. Because 

Agent 0 with sfDA6-IQN could not consider DCs provided to other agents, its collected area was inconsistent with the other agents’ heatmaps. However, Agent 0 with sfDA7-IQN col-lected objects throughout the environment, with more objects in the upper half. The difference between the upper and lower halves was not apparent compared to the results with biased DCs. The values in the ADC matrix generated from the DCs of Agents 1, 2, and 3 were 1 or 2. This shows that the entire area was covered, and the difference was 1 (= 2 − 1), which is smaller than that in Section V-C1, which was 3 (= 3 − 0). Therefore, Agent 0 collected objects throughout the entire area, not just in the upper half.               

> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (a) sfDA6-IQN
> Agent 0Agent 1Agent 2Agent 3
> (b) sfDA7-IQN

Fig. 14: Object collection locations (Exp 2) 3) Remark: Other Usages of DCs and ADCs: Human managers may intend that an agent provided with an entire DC acts solely on that DC without considering the DCs of other agents. This can be achieved by setting all ADC matrix elements to values such as N −1 and 0. DCs can also reinforce behavior in specific areas. In the learning experiment described herein, random DCs provided to the agents caused them to move evenly around all areas. Alternatively, agents can be directed to frequently move around specific areas, such as the lower half, without increasing the number of objects or rewards using DC combinations to direct such activities. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We proposed sfDA7-X to establish agent controllability after learning using MADRL. This method extends sfDA6-X [10] by introducing ADCs to express DCs provided to other agents in an aggregated form and feeding them into agents’ networks. ADCs enable agents to consider the activities of others to complement areas in which other agents collect no objects or visit infrequently. Experiments showed that agents with sfDA7-X outperformed those with sfDA6-X and achieved more reasonable activities without specific directions. The learning efficiency remained comparable to that of sfDA6-X despite additional network inputs. Future work will include extending the proposed method to improve learning in more complex environments using curriculum learning based on DCs and ADCs. REFERENCES [1] D. Bahdanau, F. Hill, J. Leike, E. Hughes, A. Hosseini, P. Kohli, and E. Grefenstette, “Learning to understand goal specifications by modelling reward,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01946 , 2018. [2] V. Chen, A. Gupta, and K. Marino, “Ask your humans: Using human instructions to improve generalization in reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00517 , 2020. [3] W. Dabney, G. Ostrovski, D. Silver, and R. Munos, “Implicit quantile networks for distributional reinforcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2018, pp. 1096–1105. [4] D. Fried, R. Hu, V. Cirik, A. Rohrbach, J. Andreas, L.-P. Morency, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, K. Saenko, D. Klein, and T. Darrell, “Speaker-follower models for vision-and-language navigation,” Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018. [5] B. Gangopadhyay, H. Soora, and P. Dasgupta, “Hierarchical program-triggered reinforcement learning agents for automated driving,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10 902–10 911, 2021. [6] X. Liang, T. Wang, L. Yang, and E. Xing, “Cirl: Controllable imitative reinforcement learning for vision-based self-driving,” in Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , 2018, pp. 584– 599. [7] D. Misra, A. Bennett, V. Blukis, E. Niklasson, M. Shatkhin, and Y. Artzi, “Mapping instructions to actions in 3d environments with visual goal prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00786 , 2018. [8] Y. Miyashita and T. Sugawara, “Analysis of coordinated behavior structures with multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,” Applied In-telligence , vol. 51, pp. 1069–1085, 2021. [9] Y. Motokawa and T. Sugawara, “Interpretability for conditional co-ordinated behavior in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in 2023 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–8. [10] ——, “Strategy-following multi-agent deep reinforcement learning through external high-level instruction,” Procedia Computer Science ,vol. 225, pp. 2798–2807, 2023. [11] M. L. Puterman, Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming . John Wiley & Sons, 2014. [12] A. Rajeswaran, S. Ghotra, B. Ravindran, and S. Levine, “Epopt: Learning robust neural network policies using model ensembles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01283 , 2016. [13] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635. [14] M. Samvelyan, T. Rashid, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, N. Nardelli, T. G. Rudner, C.-M. Hung, P. H. Torr, J. Foerster, and S. Whiteson, “The starcraft multi-agent challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043 ,2019. [15] S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Shammah, and A. Shashua, “Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement learning for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.03295 , 2016. [16] H. Shi, Y. Tian, H. Li, J. Huang, L. Shi, and Y. Zhou, “Task offloading and trajectory scheduling for uav-enabled mec networks: An madrl algorithm with prioritized experience replay,” Ad Hoc Networks , vol. 154, p. 103371, 2024. [17] S.-H. Sun, T.-L. Wu, and J. J. Lim, “Program guided agent,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [18] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. [19] T. Winograd, “Understanding natural language,” Cognitive psychology ,vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–191, 1972. [20] J. Wu, Z. Huang, Z. Hu, and C. Lv, “Toward human-in-the-loop ai: Enhancing deep reinforcement learning via real-time human guidance for autonomous driving,” Engineering , 2023. [21] Y. Yang, J. P. Inala, O. Bastani, Y. Pu, A. Solar-Lezama, and M. Rinard, “Program synthesis guided reinforcement learning for partially observed environments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, Eds., 2021. [22] H. Zhang, R. Liu, M. Li, W. Wang, and Q. Liu, “Joint sensing and communication optimization in target-mounted stars-assisted vehicular networks: A madrl approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-ogy , 2024.