Title: Dmsh: A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Framework for All-Quad Mesh Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10601v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:55:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

Dmsh : A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Framework for All-Quad Mesh Generation 

Anirudh Kalyan, Cosmin Anitescu, Xiaoying Zhuang, Timon Rabzcuk, Somdatta Goswami, Sun-dararajan Natarajan 

> arXiv:2606.10601v1 [math.NA] 9 Jun 2026

# Highlights 

Dmsh : A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Framework for All-Quad Mesh Generation 

Anirudh Kalyan, Cosmin Anitescu, Xiaoying Zhuang, Timon Rabzcuk, Somdatta Goswami, Sun-dararajan Natarajan 

❑ Fully automated 3-agent reinforcement learning pipeline for all-quad meshes 

❑ Unified block/hole decomposition and meshing within a learning framework 

❑ Computer vision-based state representation for geometry-aware decisions 

❑ Multi-agent SAC formulation for hybrid discrete–continuous actions 

❑ Validated on diverse 2D and 3D geometries with improved mesh quality Dmsh : A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Framework for All-Quad Mesh Generation 

Anirudh Kalyan a, Cosmin Anitescu b, Xiaoying Zhuang b, Timon Rabzcuk c, Somdatta Goswami d,Sundararajan Natarajan a,1, ∗

> aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai-600036, India
> bInstitute of Continuum Mechanics, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Hannover, Germany
> cInstitute of Structural Mechanics, Bauhaus-Universität Weimar, Weimar, Germany
> dDepartment of Civil and Systems Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA

Abstract 

Generating high-quality meshes for arbitrary geometries remains a fundamental bottleneck in com-putational engineering, often demanding heuristic tuning and semi-manual workflows. In this pa-per, we introduce Dmsh , a first fully automated reinforcement learning pipeline that unifies geo-metric decomposition and quadrilateral mesh generation within a single learning-based framework. 

Dmsh decomposes the problem through three coordinated agents handling topology simplification, geometric regularization, and mesh generation. The meshing process is formulated as a Markov De-cision Process and solved using a parametric Soft Actor-Critic architecture with decoupled critics, enabling efficient exploration of a hybrid discrete–continuous action space. A curriculum learning strategy ensures scalability from simple domains to highly complex geometries, suppressing seed variance. By design, the recursive decomposition enables parallel meshing of subregions, yielding globally conforming all-quadrilateral meshes without post hoc correction. Across a wide range of benchmarks, Dmsh consistently outperforms existing methods in automation, robustness, and mesh quality, establishing a new paradigm for learning-based mesh generation. 

Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Curriculum Learning, Computer Vision, Meshing, Surface Meshing 

1. Introduction 

Modern engineering design is fundamentally constrained by simulation. Every structural anal-ysis, fluid dynamics study, or thermal evaluation that a designer wants to run must wait on a solver, and solvers are slow. The dream of simulation at the speed of ideation , sometimes called hardware iteration at the speed of software, has become a defining ambition of computational engineering. Pursuing it, the community has largely converged on two complementary strategies. The first, which we term the top-down approach, seeks to replace the entire solver stack with neural-network-based surrogates. Neural Operators [1–3], which learn mapping between infinite-dimensional functional spaces, promise speedups of several orders of magnitude over classical   

> ∗Pandurangan Faculty Fellow
> Email address: snatarajan@iitm.ac.in (Sundararajan Natarajan)
> 1Corresponding author

solvers, by learning the family of partial differential equations. These approaches have achieved notable successes in design optimization, materials modeling, failure prediction, and weather fore-casting [4]. Yet for many standard engineering applications, these methods still face challenges in robustness, extrapolation, and reliability [5, 6], particularly when high accuracy is required across broad operating regimes. The second strategy, which we term the bottom-up approach, aims to accelerate the existing simulation pipeline that engineers already rely on by targeting its most labor-intensive stages with deep learning and AI [7], while still being able to obtain solutions with established error guarantees. This is not a concession; it is a recognition that the highest-fidelity simulations in industry will depend on classical solvers for the foreseeable future, and that the greatest leverage lies in removing the human bottlenecks surrounding them. Chief among these is mesh generation. Meshing is, in a precise sense, the problem that gates everything else. The NASA CFD Vision 2030 study [8] estimated that mesh generation alone can consume the majority of total engineer-ing time in a simulation workflow, more than the solve itself. While mature software exists for triangular and tetrahedral meshes, all-quadrilateral (2D) and all-hexahedral (3D) meshes, which offer superior convergence, lower numerical diffusion, and better alignment with flow features, still require substantial manual intervention: geometry clean-up, domain decomposition, and care-ful local adjustment [9, 10]. A single complex geometry can take an experienced engineer days to mesh properly. This is the problem we address. Considerable research has been devoted to automating quad mesh generation through algorith-mic approaches. Classical methods include advancing-front techniques such as paving [11], which grow the mesh inward from the boundary by sequentially placing elements, and integer-grid map methods [10], which formulate the problem as a global optimization over a cross-field. While ef-fective for many geometries, these methods can struggle with complex domains containing sharp features, holes, or highly non-convex regions, often requiring manual decomposition of the domain into simpler blocks before meshing can proceed. We introduce D MSH , the first fully automated reinforcement learning pipeline that unifies geo-metric decomposition and all-quadrilateral mesh generation within a single learning-based frame-work. Recently, there has been a growing interest in exploring machine learning approaches as a way of automating mesh generation. Zhang et al. [12] proposed MeshingNet, a deep-learning framework that predicts element sizing fields to guide conventional mesh generators. Comprehen-sive surveys by Li et al. [13] and Owen et al. [14] catalogue the growing body of work applying neural networks, generative models, and reinforcement learning to various stages of the meshing pipeline, from geometry preparation and defeaturing to element placement and quality assessment. Of particular relevance to the present work are two contributions that apply reinforcement learning directly to quad mesh generation via the advancing-front paradigm. Pan et al. [15] formulated quad mesh generation as a Markov Decision Process and trained a Soft Actor-Critic agent to sequen-tially place quadrilateral elements, demonstrating that reinforcement learning can produce meshes competitive with commercial software without manual intervention. Tong et al. [16] combined su-pervised pre-training with reinforcement learning fine-tuning to guide an advancing-front method, achieving high accuracy in reproducing commercial-quality meshes for planar domains with sharp features and boundary layers. However, both single-agent formulations are limited in their ability to handle sharp corners robustly, scale poorly to large boundaries, and do not address geometries containing holes. 

Dmsh addresses all these limitations by introducing an end-to-end pipeline of three reinforce-2ment learning agents that work in concert to decompose and mesh arbitrary geometries. The mesh-ing agent extends the formulation of Pan et al. with a Parametric Soft Actor-Critic architecture tailored to the hybrid discrete-continuous action space of the problem. Two additional vision-based agents operate upstream: a block decomposition agent that systematically partitions the domain to eliminate sharp corners and reduce boundary complexity, and a hole decomposition agent that splits geometries containing internal voids into regular sub-regions. Each sub-region is then meshed in-dependently, and the results are stitched together to produce the final all-quad mesh. This recursive decomposition strategy not only improves element quality but also enables large-scale paralleliza-tion, as the lightweight meshing agent can process all sub-regions concurrently. As long as each subdomain contains an even number of points, the result is guaranteed to be an all-quad mesh. To our knowledge, this is the first instance of computer vision being used to tackle the problem of block decomposition. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the foundations of rein-forcement learning and the Soft Actor-Critic algorithm, the foundation of our approach. Section 3 describes the meshing agent’s environment, the Parametric SAC architecture, and the curriculum learning strategy. Sections 4 and 5 detail the block and hole decomposition agents, respectively. Section 6 presents results in both 2D and 2.5D (surface meshing) and compares them against cur-rent state-of-the-art methods. 

2. Overview of Reinforcement Learning Methods 

The meshing pipeline developed in this work formulates the generation of all-quadrilateral meshes as a sequential decision-making problem solved by reinforcement learning (RL) agents. Following the atomic idea established by Zeng et al. [17], the fundamental task is recast as a Markov Decision Process by Pan et al. [15] in which, at each step, the agent either connects two existing boundary nodes or places a new node to form a quadrilateral element. The resulting ele-ment is evaluated by the environment, a reward is assigned based on its geometric quality, and the updated boundary is recursively passed back to the agent until the domain is fully discretized. Cru-cially, the agent receives only a partial, rotationally invariant observation of the boundary at each step, which promotes geometry-agnostic behaviour and generalization across diverse domains. While this single-agent formulation can produce an all-quad mesh on its own, provided the boundary has an even number of nodes, as mentioned in the earlier sections, it suffers from three practical limitations. As discussed earlier, the single agent formulation is not designed to handle holes empirically, and suffers from element quality degredation around convex boundaries. Thirdly, since geometric complexity accumulates and the strict convexity checks imposed by the environ-ment become increasingly difficult to satisfy, the agent’s error rate increases, causing a longer runtime. To address these issues, two additional vision-based agents are introduced upstream of the mesher: a block decomposition agent, and a hole decomposition agent. All three agents in the pipeline are trained using variants of the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algo-rithm [18], an off-policy actor-critic method well suited to continuous and hybrid action spaces. The remainder of this section introduces the formal foundations of reinforcement learning and then presents the SAC framework in detail. The later part of the background section then discusses our modifications that better suit the underlying problem at hand. 32.1. Fundamentals of Reinforcement Learning 

Reinforcement learning problems are typically formalized within the framework of a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [19, 20], defined by the tuple (S, A, P, R, γ). Here S denotes the set of states, s the agent may occupy, A is the set of actions, a available to it, P(s′|s, a) specifies the probability of transitioning to state s′ after taking action a in state s, R(s, a) is the scalar reward received for that transition, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor that controls the trade-off between immediate and future rewards. A policy π(a|s) defines a probability distribution over actions conditioned on the current state, and the central goal of an RL agent is to find a policy that maximizes the expected cumula-tive discounted reward. The quality of a policy is characterized by two closely related quanti-ties. The state-value function V π (s) = Eπ [∑∞ 

> t=0

γt rt | s0 = s] gives the expected return when start-ing from state s and thereafter following policy π, while the action-value function Qπ (s, a) = 

Eπ [∑∞ 

> t=0

γt rt | s0 = s, a0 = a] gives the expected return when first taking action a in state s and then following π. Both functions satisfy the Bellman equations [19], which express a recursive relationship between the value of a state and the values of its successors: 

Qπ (s, a) = R(s, a) + γ ∑

> s′

P(s′|s, a)V π (s′),

V π (s) = ∑

> a

π(a|s) Qπ (s, a). (1) The empirical goal of these equations is to numerically express all the information about the future in the present. The algorithms developed to solve MDPs can be broadly grouped into three families. Value-based methods , such as Q-learning [21], learn the optimal action-value function 

Q∗(s, a) directly and derive the policy by acting greedily with respect to it. Deep Q-Networks (DQN) [22] extended this approach by approximating Q∗ with a convolutional neural network, demonstrating that RL agents could learn control policies from high-dimensional sensory inputs such as raw pixel observations, something that we take advantage of with Dmsh . However, value-based methods are largely restricted to discrete action spaces, which limits their applicability to problems requiring continuous control. 

Policy gradient methods address this limitation by parameterizing the policy directly and opti-mizing it by estimating the gradient of the expected return with respect to the policy parameters. The REINFORCE algorithm [23] is the prototypical example, using Monte Carlo roll-outs to con-struct an unbiased gradient estimate. Because the policy is represented explicitly, these methods naturally accommodate continuous and stochastic policies, though they can suffer from high vari-ance in the gradient estimates. 

Actor-critic methods [24] combine the strengths of both approaches: an actor network learns the policy while a critic network estimates the value function, which serves as a variance-reducing baseline for the policy gradient, thereby the pair learn to estimate the advantage of taking an action. This architecture forms the basis of many modern RL algorithms, including the Soft Actor-Critic method described in the following subsection, which augments the standard actor-critic objective with an entropy regularization term to encourage exploration whilst searching for optimality. 

2.2. Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) Methods 

Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) is an off-policy actor-critic deep reinforcement learning algorithm based on the maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework. Unlike standard reinforce-ment learning, which seeks only to maximize the expected sum of rewards, SAC aims to maximize 4the expected reward while also maximizing entropy. This entropy regularization encourages explo-ration and prevents the policy from converging prematurely to a sub-optimal deterministic behavior. 

2.2.1. The Core Objective 

The objective of Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning is to learn a policy π that maxi-mizes the weighted sum of expected reward and entropy: 

J(π) = 

> T

# ∑

> t=0

E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r(st , at ) + αH (π(·| st ))] , (2) where H (π(·| st )) = −Ea∼π [log π(a|st )] denotes the entropy of the policy at state st , and α is the 

temperature parameter that controls the stochasticity of the optimal policy. 

2.2.2. Soft Value Functions 

To incorporate the entropy terms, SAC modifies the standard Bellman equations to derive two “soft" value functions, viz., Soft Q-value and the soft state-value. The soft Q-value, Q(st , at ),accounts for both the immediate reward and the expected future value of the state, which includes the entropy of future actions, given by: 

Q(st , at ) = r(st , at ) + γEst+1∼p [V (st+1)] . (3) The value function V (st ) is the additive sum of expected Q-value and the entropy of the policy at that state, given by: 

V (st ) = Eat ∼π [Q(st , at ) − α log π(at |st )] . (4) 

2.2.3. The Learning Process 

The algorithm optimizes the following three components through the stochastic gradient de-scent: the critic (Q-functions), the actor (policy), and the temperature ( α). 

Soft Q-Function Update. SAC utilizes Clipped Double-Q Learning to mitigate positive bias. Two Q-networks are parameterized by θ1, θ2. The parameters are trained to minimize the soft Bellman residual: 

JQ(θ ) = E(s,a,r,s′)∼D

12

 Qθ (s, a) −  r + γV¯θ (s′) 2



. (5) where V¯θ (s′) is the target value estimate derived from a target network. It is worth reiterating that only one of the 2 networks are trained via gradient descent and the other is trained as a moving average of the first network to maintain stability. 

Policy Optimization. The policy parameters φ are optimized to maximize the expected Q-value plus the entropy term. Using the reparameterization trick at = fφ (εt ; st ) (where εt is sampled from a fixed Gaussian), the objective becomes differentiable: 

Jπ (φ ) = Es∼D,ε∼N

α log πφ ( fφ (ε; s)|s) − Qθ (s, fφ (ε; s))  . (6) 

Temperature Auto-Tuning. To avoid manual tuning of the exploration trade-off, α is learned by minimizing the following objective with respect to a target entropy ¯H :

J(α) = Ea∼π

−α log π(a|s) − α ¯H  . (7) 53. Meshing 

3.1. Environment Architecture 

In any RL framework, the environment plays a crucial role in supporting convergence, and a delicate balance must be struck to ensure the agent cannot exploit shortcuts while still being conducive to learning the optimal policy. To this end, a custom reinforcement learning environment is written from the ground up to automate the generation of quadrilateral meshes via an advancing front technique [11]. As discussed in Section 2, the meshing process is modeled as a Markov Decision Process in which a continuous domain Ω is discretized through the sequential removal of area from the boundary ∂ Ω. The environment is built upon the Shapely library for computational geometry and NumPy for vector manipulations. The formulation defines the state space as a partial, rotationally invariant representation of the local geometry. The action space is designed to support both the insertion of new vertices and the establishment of connectivity among existing nodes. In addition, the environment incorporates repair operators that enable recovery from geometrically degenerate configurations. 

3.1.1. Front Selection and Reference Vertex 

At each time step t, a specific segment of the boundary, ∂ Ωt is selected to serve as the local context for the agent. A process is Markov if, and only if, the current state contains all the infor-mation needed to predict the distribution of the next state, so truly random selection would break the Markov assumption. Hence, a deterministic priority-based selection mechanism is employed. A priority score S(vi) is computed for every vertex vi ∈ ∂ Ωt . This score is a weighted linear combination of the interior angle θi and the deviation of the adjacent edge lengths from a target element size Ltarget :

S(vi) = λ · θi + ( 1 − λ ) · |¯li − Ltarget |

Ltarget 

, (8) where ¯ li denotes the mean length of the two edges incident to vi, and λ is a weighting factor empirically set to the inverse golden ratio ( ≈ 0.618) to balance angular validity with dimensional uniformity. The vertex v0 minimizing S(vi) is selected as the reference vertex. To prevent the agent from cycling through unsolvable configurations and entering an infinite loop recursively, a “blacklist” mechanism is utilized; vertices associated with repeated invalid actions are temporarily excluded from selection. Moreover, to ensure that the best quality elements are placed near the original boundary, nodes representing the original boundary are further multiplied by a weighing factor. 

3.1.2. State Representation 

The pursuit for creating a rotationally and translationally invariant representation rules out pass-ing global coordinates. Consequently, a local, rotationally invariant polar coordinate system is established for each observation, centered at v0, the reference vertex. 

Local Coordinate Frame Definition. The local frame is constructed by fixing the origin at the reference vertex v0 and computing a bisector vector ⃗ b from the unit vectors pointing toward the left neighbor vL1 and the right neighbor vR1. A candidate x-axis is aligned with ⃗ b; to ensure that this axis points into the interior of the domain Ω, a test point ptest = v0 + ε⃗ b is generated, and if 

ptest /∈ Ω (indicating a convex corner) the axis orientation is inverted. The y-axis is then derived via 6a 90 ◦ counter-clockwise rotation of the corrected x-axis. This construction ensures that the agent empirically learns that an angle of zero corresponds to a point along the bisector, which speeds up convergence and keeps the action space symmetric with respect to the bisector. 

Feature Vector Construction. The state vector st , with dimension Dstate = 2(2Nneigh + Nf an ) + 1, is composed of features projected into this local frame and normalized by a scaling factor Lscale =

β · Ltarget (where β = 6.0). The first component consists of the polar coordinates (r, φ ) of Nneigh =

3 neighboring vertices to the left and right of v0. To perceive non-adjacent boundary walls or obstacles deeper within the domain, Nf an = 3 fan-sensing rays are cast within the angular wedge defined by vL1 and vR1; the intersection points of these rays with the global boundary are computed, transformed to the local frame, and appended to the state. Finally, a scalar domain ratio ρt =

At /Ainitial is included to indicate the remaining area relative to the initial domain size. This domain ratio is the only sense of global context the agent receives, and proves to be sufficient for it to develop an effective global picture of the meshing progress. 

3.1.3. Action Space Dynamics 

A hybrid discrete-continuous action space is utilized, denoted as (atype , aparams ), with validity masks applied to filter action types based on the vertex count of the current boundary. The first action type ( Type 0: Stitching ) is discrete: a quadrilateral is formed by connecting v0 to an existing non-adjacent vertex, with candidate quads constructed from index sets {(i − 1, i, i + 1, i + 2)} and 

{(i − 2, i − 1, i, i + 1)}. This stitching action is critical for closing the mesh loop and is solely responsible for reducing the global number of boundary nodes, since the alternative action adds and removes a node simultaneously. The second action type ( Type 1: Creation ) is continuous: a new vertex vnew is generated by mapping the continuous parameters aparams ∈ [−1, 1]2 to local polar coordinates (r, θ ), where the radius is scaled to r ∈ [0, α · Ltarget ] (with α = 2.0) and the angle is mapped relative to the current wedge aperture. The global coordinates of vnew are then reconstructed via an inverse transformation of the local frame matrix. It is worth noting that for the stitching action, the specific choice of which quadrilateral to close is performed by the environment rather than the agent, relieving the agent of some combinatorial complexity. Upon action proposal, strict geometric validity checks are enforced: the resulting quadrilateral must be convex, strictly contained within the prepared geometry of ∂ Ωt , and free of intersections with any existing edges. 

3.1.4. Reward Formulation 

The reward function R(s, a) is designed to drive the policy toward generating regular, isotropic elements while strictly penalizing topological defects and ensuring efficient termination. We define the total reward as a composite of geometric quality, boundary fidelity, and topological constraints: 

R(s, a) = ( ηe + ηb − 1) + Pspeed + Pvalence . (9) We introduce several modifications to the reward framework introduced by Pan et al. [15] to en-hance convergence and mesh regularity. First, rather than relying on simple aspect ratios, the element quality term ηe utilizes the Scaled Jacobian [25] of the generated quadrilateral, normal-ized to [0, 1], to rigorously detect and penalize inverted elements; we frame our entire optimization around this value. Second, we redefine the boundary quality term ηb as a multiplicative aggre-gate of angular deviation, boundary narrowness, and transition smoothness, ensuring that the agent 7prioritizes the long-term "health" of the evolving boundary over greedy element placement. To en-force size constraints, a penalty Pspeed is applied when the element area deviates from the optimal range [Amin , Amax ], actively discouraging the formation of degenerate slivers as well as abnormally large elements. Finally, we introduce a discrete valence penalty Pvalence that is triggered whenever a vertex in the new element exceeds a valence of four; this explicitly promotes a regular grid topology and minimizes singularities. To proactively prevent the advancing front from collapsing into bottlenecks or creating self-intersections, we introduce a specific narrowness penalty φnarrow into the reward structure. This term evaluates the proximity of the active reference vertex vre f to non-adjacent segments of the boundary, guard-ing against the formation of singularities that are geometrically impossible to mesh. We first define a narrowness ratio ρ, calculated as the ratio of the minimum clearance distance dmin to the local element scale: 

ρ = min v∈B\N (vre f ) ∥v − vre f ∥

2 · ¯llocal 

, (10) where B denotes the set of boundary vertices, N (vre f ) represents the immediate topological neigh-bors of the reference vertex (excluded to avoid trivial zero distances), and ¯ llocal is the average length of the edges connected to vre f . The penalty is applied via a piecewise function that imposes a soft barrier as the front narrows ( ρ < 1.0) and a severe penalty when collision is imminent ( ρ < 0.5): 

φnarrow =



1.0 if ρ ≥ 1.0

ρ if 0 .5 ≤ ρ < 1.00.3ρ if ρ < 0.5.

(11) Furthermore, to ensure the updated boundary maintains both angular flatness and metric uniformity, critical factors for the stability of subsequent element generation. We implement a smoothness penalty φsmooth . This factor is computed as a weighted aggregate of an angular consistency term 

Qang and a metric consistency term Qmet , balancing geometric regularity with size constraints: 

φsmooth = 0.6 · Qang + 0.4 · Qmet . (12) The angular term Qang penalizes sharp kinks in the boundary by measuring the maximum deviation of local interior angles θi from a straight line ( π radians) within the immediate neighborhood of the new element. Simultaneously, the metric term Qmet evaluates the uniformity of edge lengths, penalizing high variance ( σl /μl ) and deviation from the target characteristic length ltarget :

Qang = 1 − min 



1, max i |θi − π|

π/2



, Qmet = exp 



−

σl

μl

+ 0.5 · |μl − ltarget |

ltarget 

 

. (13) Collectively, these modifications empower the agent to transcend simple element quality maximiza-tion, strategizing node placement to maintain a boundary that is free of narrow bottlenecks or sharp irregularities detrimental to convergence. 

3.1.5. Failure Recovery and Mesh Repair 

Given the fragile nature of the computational geometry, a robust recovery loop is implemented to resolve states where no valid action can be sampled. If the consecutive-failure counter surpasses a threshold, a multi-stage repair sequence is initiated. The first stage performs a heuristic geometric 8expansion in which vertices exhibiting reflex angles ( > 180 ◦) or acute kinks are iteratively shifted toward ideal positions defined by their neighbors (targeting 90 ◦ or 135 ◦ interior angles). If this heuristic pass fails to restore validity, the second stage applies a constrained Laplacian smoothing in which all non-fixed nodes are updated according to: 

vk+1 

> i

= vki + γ( ¯vneighbors − vki ). (14) Strict domain containment is enforced, where nodes are permitted to slide along the boundary or traverse the interior but are strictly prevented from crossing domain boundaries. Following smoothing, a global integrity check is executed. If self-intersections persist, the environment state is reverted to the pre-recovery snapshot and the episode is terminated with a heavy penalty. The smoothing contributes the most to helping repair the intermediate boundary to facilitate further meshing, while the geometric expansion adds some amount of variance to the smoothed nodes to enable distinct vertex selection and higher quality elements. The strict checks, combined with the occasional use of the recovery loops, mean that the en-vironment takes up a major chunk of computational overhead ( ≈ 72%) during meshing, with the actual inferencing of the agent taking a very small chunk of the time ( ≈ 18%). 

3.1.6. Termination Criteria 

An episode terminates under one of three conditions. The first, and desired, outcome is success-ful discretization of the domain, which occurs when the number of boundary vertices reaches N ≤ 4; in this case, a final high-fidelity Laplacian smoothing is applied, and a finishing reward R f inish = 10 is granted. The episode also terminates if the recovery mechanism described above fails to resolve a geometric deadlock, or if a maximum step count or maximum consecutive-failure limit is reached. Consequently, relevant penalties/rewards are given depending on the criteria/degree of offense. 

3.2. Parametric Soft Actor-Critic (P-SAC) Agent 

We now turn our attention to Dmsh ’s first agent, the meshing agent. Empirically, it is important that the agent architecture aligns with the structure of the action space to support convergence to the optimal policy. While the current SOTA implementation employs a standard Soft Actor-Critic method, the hybrid discrete-continuous nature of choosing an action, then choosing the parame-ters of that action in meshing, motivates the adoption of a Parametric Soft Actor-Critic (P-SAC) framework inspired by Fan et al., Lin et al. [26–28]. In this formulation, the action space A is defined as a tuple (k, z), where k ∈ { 0, 1} represents a discrete action type and z ∈ Rn represents the continuous parameters associated with that type. Unlike standard SAC, which assumes a homogeneous action space (either purely discrete or purely continuous), this implementation utilizes a unified actor with split heads and a modular critic architecture that decouples the value estimation of distinct action topologies. In practice, this allows the actor to maintain two separate output spaces: one to decide which action type to execute, and another to determine the continuous parameters if type 1 is chosen. We maintain 2 classes of critics, one for type 0 discrete action and one for type 1 continuous action. Within each class of critic, there are 4 neural networks, 2 of which are online and are updated through gradient descent (twin networks to prevent overestimation bias), and 2 networks that are updated using polyak averaging to maintain stability. The averaged networks act as target networks for the Bellman update. 9Algorithm 1 Failure Recovery Loop for Geometric Deadlocks  

> 1:

Input: Current boundary ∂ Ωt , target element size Ltarget , threshold Tf ail  

> 2:

Initialize: c f ail ← 0 

> 3:

if action _valid == False then  

> 4:

c f ail ← c f ail + 1 

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

if c f ail ≥ Tf ail then  

> 7:

Stage 1: Geometric Expansion (Heuristic)  

> 8:

for each vertex vi ∈ ∂ Ωt do  

> 9:

if θi > 180 ◦ (Reflex Angle) then  

> 10:

Calculate ideal position videal based on 90 ◦/135 ◦ targets  

> 11:

vi ← vi + λ (videal − vi) ▷ Shift toward local convexity  

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Stage 2: Constrained Laplacian Smoothing  

> 15:

while not converged and k < kmax do  

> 16:

vnew = vki + γ

 1 

> |Ni|

∑ j∈Ni vkj − vki

 

> 17:

if Prepared (∂ Ωinit ).contains (vnew ) then  

> 18:

vk+1 

> i

← vnew  

> 19:

else  

> 20:

Project vnew to nearest valid boundary segment  

> 21:

end if  

> 22:

k ← k + 1 

> 23:

end while  

> 24:

Stage 3: Global Integrity Check  

> 25:

if ∂ Ωt is self-intersecting or Area (∂ Ωt ) < ε then  

> 26:

Revert to snapshot ∂ Ωt−1 

> 27:

Terminate: Return Failure Penalty  

> 28:

else  

> 29:

c f ail ← 0 

> 30:

Return: Updated ∂ Ωt 

> 31:

end if  

> 32:

end if 

10 Figure 1: Schematic of the meshing agent architecture 

3.2.1. Unified Parametric Actor 

The policy network, parameterized by θ , utilizes a shared feature extractor followed by two specialized heads. The discrete head outputs logits l ∈ R2 to model the categorical distribution 

πdisc (k|s) over action types, while the continuous head outputs the mean μ(s) and log standard deviation log σ (s) to model the conditional Gaussian distribution πcont (z|s, k = 1). For action type 

k = 0, no continuous parameters are generated since the actual execution is handled by the envi-ronment, and is deterministic in nature, given the current state. The full policy density is given by the chain rule: 

π(a|s) = πdisc (k|s) · I[k=1]πcont (z|s) + πdisc (k|s) · I[k=0]. (15) 

3.2.2. Asymmetric Target Entropy Tuning 

To appropriately balance exploration and exploitation in this hybrid space, the P-SAC formu-lation utilizes a dual temperature tuning mechanism. While the continuous action space utilizes a standard target entropy heuristic, the discrete action space requires a specialized approach due to the asymmetric nature of the optimal policy. Standard discrete SAC typically sets a target entropy that encourages a uniform distribution across actions. However, our environment exhibits a highly skewed optimal action distribution. Since we place more nodes inside the boundary than connect existing nodes (type 0 action is called as many times as there are boundary nodes), the continuous action is called almost 4 × as often as the discrete action. A uniform target entropy would artificially penalize the agent for converging to this optimal, low-entropy behavioral prior. To prevent this, we calculate the discrete target entropy H disc target using the Shannon entropy of our expected asymmetric binomial distribution: 

H disc target = −(0.18 log 0 .18 + 0.82 log 0 .82 ). (16) By explicitly defining the target entropy to match this 18/82 split, the temperature parameter αdisc 

correctly scales down when the agent discovers the optimal skewed policy, preventing the algorithm from forcing sub-optimal exploration. The 18-82 split is arrived at after empirical experimentation. 

3.2.3. Decoupled Critic System 

To handle the variable dimensionality of the input space, the Q-function is decomposed into separate neural networks: Qφ0 (s) estimates the value of the non-parametric stitching action, and 11 Qφ1 (s, z) estimates the value of the parametric creation action. Twin Delayed Q-learning is em-ployed for each branch, resulting in four critic networks total ( Qφ0,1 , Qφ0,2 , Qφ1,1 , Qφ1,2 ) to mitigate overestimation bias. This decoupled structure is a natural fit for the meshing problem, as each value function can be individually evaluated based on the action type that was taken, thereby de-correlating their gradient updates and improving learning stability. 

3.2.4. Critic Update (Masked Loss) 

Standard Bellman updates are modified to strictly update the critic corresponding to the sampled action type. Given a batch of transitions, the loss for the critics is computed using a binary mask 

Mk = I[action _type =k]:

J(φk) = Eτ∼D

h

Mk ·  Qφk (s, zk) − ytarget 

2i

, (17) where the target ytarget aggregates values from both action types weighted by their predicted prob-abilities: 

ytarget = r + γ(1 − d) ∑

> k∈{ 0,1}

π(k|s′)



min  

> j=1,2

Qtarget , j(s′, ˜z′) − α log π(·)



. (18) 

3.2.5. Dual-Entropy Tuning 

The implementation addresses the scale difference between discrete logits and continuous den-sities by utilizing two distinct temperature parameters, αdisc and αcont , which are optimized inde-pendently: 

J(αdisc ) = E[−αdisc (H (πdisc ) − ¯Hdisc )] 

J(αcont ) = E[−αcont (log πcont (z|s) + ¯Hcont )] . (19) This ensures that exploration is maintained effectively in both the high-level strategy (action type selection) and low-level control (parameter selection). Overall, this agent setup allows us to scale to more actions in a much more straightforward way that enables a future expansion to generate more polygonal elements, such as hexagonal elements, and even hexahedral elements for 3D meshing. We simply would have to increase the number of logits and add a critic for each type of new action created. For the purposes of this paper, we stick to all-quad meshing. 

3.3. Curriculum Learning 

A major issue with RL algorithms is that convergence is usually highly seed-dependent, as most optimal policies contain too many degrees of freedom to optimize in parallel, and hence a good starting point matters much more. In the case of quad meshing, the agent has to ensure completion, create high-quality elements, maintain a smooth, meshable boundary, as well as reduce singularities, all while staying relatively lightweight at around 100k parameters. To address this, a two-phase training procedure is introduced that utilizes curriculum learning [29] to progressively increase the problem complexity and achieve reliable convergence. 

3.3.1. Phase 1: Pre-training 

Before elements can be adjusted, the agent needs to understand what a good element contributes to. Two out of the four terms in the loss function are dedicated to creating good-quality elements; hence, it is important that the agent reaches this checkpoint before it proceeds with a more contex-tual response to the state. 12 This is achieved by simply limiting the outer boundary to a perfect square, as it is the simplest geometry that perfectly splits into smaller squares, thereby creating a form of local minima for the agent to reach quickly, regardless of initialization. Empirically, this is set to be around 100,000 steps before the second phase of training is initi-ated. Figure 2 illustrates the progression of the agent during this phase.      

> (a) 5k Steps (b) 7k Steps (c) 10k Steps
> (d) 20k Steps (e) 50k Steps (f) 100k Steps
> Figure 2: Evolution of the meshing agent during the curriculum pre-training phase on a square domain. Early in training (5k–10k steps), the agent produces irregular and poorly aligned quadrilateral elements. As training progresses (20k–100k steps), the agent learns stable advancing-front behavior, generating smoother boundaries, improved element orthogonality, and increasingly uniform all-quadrilateral meshes.

3.3.2. Phase 2: Ensemble Training 

We now introduce the most significant of the two phases. In this phase, the agent learns tem-poral relations between the geometry and the planning of elements to accommodate the ultimate geometry. An interesting advantage of this recursive formulation is that although the input geome-tries are only in the single digits, since each step creates a unique boundary and in turn a unique local state representation the agent sees a wide variety of different states, leading to a dense implicit dataset generated automatically. This effect is further exemplified using dataset bagging , where a set of geometries is associated with a score (net averaged reward), and a domain is chosen every n training episodes on a softmax basis for the agent to learn from. The boundaries are updated every n episodes. 13 Figure 3: Representative set of geometries used during the ensemble-training phase. The agent is exposed to domains with varying curvature, concavity, aspect ratios, and local topological complexity, enabling the policy to generalize beyond the simple square geometry used during curriculum pre-training. 

14 This prevents any form of overfitting and generates a dense variety of local data. This phase is significantly longer than the pre-training phase, lasting 1.5–2 million time-steps. The converged agent has the ability to work around most geometries and guarantees an all-quad mesh, unless an odd number of points are given, in which case the last element would remain a triangle. We report the results of the benefits of using curriculum learning in the results section. 

4. Block Decomposition 

Although the new RL-based meshing agent exhibits more robustness to oblique geometries, its fundamental paving method limits it from wrapping around highly convex points, causing either catastrophic breakdowns or low-quality elements near the sharp ends. Moreover, due to the in-creasing complexity of an incomplete boundary, reduced freedom, and strict convexity checks by the environment, the error rate increases with the number of elements made by a single agent, in-creasing meshing time in a non-linear fashion. Hence, another agent is developed that sits upstream of the meshing agent that splits the existing boundary into new blocks in a recursive manner. This decomposition also enables parallelisation, as now, each blocks are meshed independently by a separate agent, with no need for mutual communication. The decomposition discretizes the nodes in such a way that mesh conformity is maintained at the end. Note that our definition of block decomposition is more relaxed than the traditional sense, which expects perfect rectangular blocks to be generated [30]. Since the downstream mesher demonstrates impressive robustness to oblique shapes, the primary goal of this agent is to remove reflex angles without creating any slivers/bad elements, rather than creating rectangles. In fact, this relaxation creates more complexity as the agent can now cast rays in any direction to generate blocks, rather than only at right angles. Inspired by the pioneering work done by Silver et al. in using RL to play Atari [31], this complexity is handled by introducing a hybrid, multimodal, vector-vision-based input that allows for human-like, nuanced decision-making by the agent. Unlike the meshing agent, which only observes a local view, this agent observes a local and a global view of the boundary with the help of a siamese convolutional neural network [32], which establishes separate encoders for both views, enabling rich feature learning at both scales. 

4.1. Environment Formulation 

We formulate the decomposition process as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) defined by the tuple (S , A , P, R, γ), where the agent interacts with a dynamic geometric boundary ∂ Ω. The environment operates via a recursive decomposition strategy: at each step t, the agent selects a target sub-region (block) and a point of interest v0 to execute a split, partitioning the domain into two simpler sub-domains. The points of interest are generated based on the internal angle being greater than a set threshold αt .

4.1.1. State Representation 

To capture both local geometric fidelity and global topological context, the block decomposition agent employs a hybrid grayscale state representation st = ( xvec , ximg ) consisting of a rotationally invariant vector component and a visual component. We source a dataset of geometries with highly convex angles from Tong et al. [16]. Being a visual CNN, this network requires far more data to achieve a good policy. The vector state xvec encodes the immediate neighborhood of the focus vertex v0, and is the same representation as we discussed in 3.1.2. 15 Figure 4: Representative set of geometries used during the ensemble-training phase. The agent is exposed to domains with varying curvature, concavity, aspect ratios, and local topological complexity, enabling the policy to generalize beyond the simple square geometry used during curriculum pre-training. 

While a highly partial view suffices for the meshing agent, the block decomposition agent requires greater fidelity to determine the precise angle at which a splitting ray should be cast. Fan-sensing rays alone tend to miss crucial geometric features due to their limited angular coverage, motivating the introduction of a visual state ximg consisting of a dual-channel rasterized image generated via OpenCV. The first channel is a high-resolution local crop centered at v0 and oriented along the bisector, capturing detailed vertex configurations in the immediate vicinity. The second channel is a downsampled global representation of the entire domain Ω, providing context for the overall shape. Two separate 128 ×128 images are used rather than a single high-resolution image to prevent over-parameterization of the CNN feature extractor while still conveying both local detail and global context. The local images are rendered such that the agent is always in the center (denoted by the black dot), while the global images are rendered to give positional context for the agent. Both images maintain the same orientation. These consistencies are maintained to eliminate variation before passing into the pseudo-siamese encoder. 

4.1.2. Action Space and Steering 

The action space is continuous, at ∈ [−1, 1]. The primary component, a0, determines the split-ting direction relative to the local bisector, once again reflecting the coordinate system of the mesh-ing agent. The steering angle φ is derived as: 

φ = a0 ·

αv0

2



· η (20) where αv0 is the interior angle and η <= 1 is a safety scaling factor. Essentially, the agent can cast a ray across the entire interior angle range of the point of interest. A ray is cast from v0 in the direction φ . If the ray intersects the boundary at point pint , the environment attempts to snap pint to the nearest existing vertex vnear to avoid creating degenerate sliver elements, maintain conformity, and not change the input element count. 

4.1.3. Topological Constraints and Robust Parity 

A critical requirement for all-quadrilateral meshing is that the number of vertices in any bound-ary loop must be even. We enforce this via a Robust Parity Check . Let the domain be split into two loops, ∂ Ω1 and ∂ Ω2, by a cut C consisting of m internal vertices. For a valid quad-meshable topology, the vertex count |∂ Ωi| must satisfy: 

|∂ Ωi| ≡ 0 (mod 2 ) (21) 16 If a split results in an odd vertex count, the environment invokes a correction subroutine. Unlike naive approaches that might split the newly created cut C , our method strictly searches for the longest edge e ∈ ∂ Ωinitial (edges belonging to the original domain boundary) and bisects it. This preserves the geometric quality of the internal cuts while satisfying mesh conformity. 

4.1.4. Reward Function 

The reward function R(s, a) balances geometric quality with topological balance: 

R = wq · Qortho + wb · Bsplit + Rprogress − Ppenalty (22) The orthogonality term Qortho measures the deviation of the split angles from π/2 at both endpoints and carries the largest weight, since maintaining angles close to 90 ◦ or 180 ◦ is essential for gener-ating healthy blocks that the downstream meshing agent can process effectively. The balance term 

Bsplit is the ratio of the perimeter lengths of the two resulting sub-loops, encouraging roughly equal partitions. A sparse progress reward Rprogress is triggered whenever a reflex vertex (a “point of interest”) is eliminated by the split. The environment monitors and rewards the new angles created by each cut, providing the agent with a dense learning signal. 

4.2. Block Decomposition Agent 

> Figure 5: Architecture of the block decomposition reinforcement learning agent. Local and global rasterized geometry representations are processed by separate convolutional encoders and fused with geometric vector features to form a hybrid latent representation. The resulting embedding is used by the Soft Actor-Critic policy and critic networks to predict splitting directions that simplify the geometry into meshable subdomains.

The block decomposition agent utilizes a Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) framework [18] adapted for hybrid state spaces, processing high-dimensional visual inputs alongside low-dimensional vector coordinates. The state at time step t is defined as a tuple st = ( It , vt ), where It ∈ R2×H×W represents the visual input comprising the local and global single-channel views ( Iloc t , Iglob t ), and vt ∈ Rdv rep-resents the coordinate vector state. The architecture consists of a shared feature-extraction strategy employed across decoupled actor and critic networks. Due to the high fidelity, multimodal input, the block decomposition agent is the biggest among the 3 in the pipeline, with the actor requiring around 1.5M parameters end-to-end. 17 4.2.1. Feature Extraction and Policy Network 

The visual input It is processed by a pseudo-siamese dual encoder that, unlike standard siamese networks with shared weights, employs two distinct Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to capture features specific to the local and global perspectives. Let fφloc and fφglob denote the local and global CNNs, respectively. Each network consists of three convolutional layers with 3 × 3 kernels and a stride of 2, followed by a flattening operation, a linear projection, and Layer Normalization. The visual embedding zimg is obtained by concatenating and fusing the two branch outputs: 

hloc = LayerNorm (ReLU ( fφloc (Iloc t ))) 

hglob = LayerNorm (ReLU ( fφglob (Iglob t ))) 

zimg = ReLU (W f usion [hloc ⊕ hglob ]) ,

(23) where ⊕ denotes concatenation and W f usion is a learned linear transformation. This produces a high-dimensional feature representation of the visual observation. The policy network πθ (at |st ) maps the hybrid state to a probability distribution over actions. The vector state vt is encoded via a separate Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), gθ , yielding zvec . A joint state representation is formed by fusing the visual and vector embeddings, z joint = [ zimg ⊕zvec ],which is then passed through a trunk MLP that bifurcates into two heads predicting the mean μθ

and the log-standard deviation log σθ of a Gaussian distribution. The action at is sampled using the reparameterization trick: 

at = tanh (μθ (st ) + σθ (st ) · ε), ε ∼ N (0, I). (24) 

4.2.2. Critic Network and Training 

Twin critics Qψ1 and Qψ2 are employed to mitigate value overestimation, with the target network updated via Polyak averaging. Crucially, the critics maintain their own separate instances of the image and vector encoders, ensuring that gradients from the Bellman updates do not interfere with the policy’s feature learning. Each critic approximates the Q-value by fusing the state features with the action: 

Qψi (st , at ) = MLP ψi ([ zimg ⊕ zvec ⊕ at ]) (25) for i ∈ { 1, 2}. The critics are trained to minimize the mean squared soft Bellman residual: 

JQ(ψi) = E(st ,at )∼D

(Qψi (st , at ) − yt )2 (26) where the target yt = rt + γ(1 − dt )( min j=1,2 Q ¯ψ j (st+1, at+1) − α log πθ (at+1|st+1)) . The actor pa-rameters are optimized to maximize the expected return while encouraging entropy: 

Jπ (θ ) = Est ∼D



α log πθ (at |st ) − min  

> j=1,2

Qψ j (st , at )



(27) Finally, the temperature parameter α is automatically tuned to satisfy a target entropy constraint ¯H by minimizing: 

J(α) = Eat ∼πt [−α(log πt (at |st ) + ¯H )] (28) 18 Figure 6: Dual-scale visual observation used by the hole decomposition agent. The global image encodes the overall geometry and hole configuration, while the local image provides a magnified view centered at the pole of inaccessibility inside the target hole. This representation enables the agent to infer geometrically valid cutting directions independent of the underlying vertex count. 

5. Hole Decomposition 

To make this agent truly scalable and create an opportunity for end-to-end parallelization, it emerged that another framework would be required to split geometries with holes into blocks. Hence, another agent is trained specifically to split hole-geometries should they be present. This problem warrants another agent to perfectly cut a hole; the agent is best placed inside the hole instead of on the boundary. We restrict ourselves purely to the visual state, rather than the hybrid state as viewed by the block decomposition agent. 

5.1. Environment Formulation 

The proposed environment models the hole decomposition task as a sequential decision-making process. The objective is to decompose a complex polygon Pinit containing holes H = {h1, . . . , hn}

into a set of convex, rectangular-like blocks B suitable for high-quality mesh generation. Crucially, if the agent creates sharp angles of incidence, they will severely affect the quality of elements gen-erated by the meshing module downstream. We model our reward function around this crucial condition. 

5.1.1. Observation Space 

The observation space is image-based to allow the agent to learn geometric features agnostic to vertex count, thereby enabling scale invariance. At each time step t, the state St consists of two stacked binary masks representing local and global contexts: 

St = {Iglobal , Ilocal } ∈ { 0, 1}H×W ×2 (29) The agent is positioned at a point v0 located inside the current target hole. To ensure robust posi-tioning distinct from the polygon centroid (which may fall outside concave geometries), the Pole of Inaccessibility is used—defined as the center of the largest inscribed circle within the hole hi. This choice also avoids sensitivity to non-uniform boundary discretizations that can shift the geometric centroid. The global channel Iglobal captures the entire bounding box of the remaining geometry, normalized to the image size, while the local channel Ilocal is a cropped view centered on v0 with a zoom factor of 5 × (covering 20% of the global span) to resolve fine details near the cutting site. We add a crosshair to further promote orientation, since this agent does not have coordinate information that the hole decomposition agent has. 19 5.1.2. Action Space, Dual-Ray Cutting, and Parity Enforcement 

The action space is continuous and defined as A ∈ [−1, 1]2. The agent selects two cutting angles relative to the geometric center v0:

at = [ θ1, θ2] where θi ∈ [−π, π] (30) These angles define two ray directions ⃗ d1,⃗ d2. The environment computes the intersection of each ray with the polygon boundary ∂ P:

pi = v0 + ti⃗ di, ti = min {t > 0 | (v0 + t⃗ di) ∈ ∂ P} (31) A topological cut is then performed by constructing a cutter string via Shapely operations, parti-tioning the domain into two blocks per step. These blocks are evaluated by the environment, and an appropriate reward is assigned. As with the block decomposition environment, an even-vertex parity constraint is enforced to facilitate downstream quad meshing. For every generated polygon P whose vertex count |VP| is odd, the environment performs an implicit edge split. The splitting logic prioritizes geometric fidelity: letting EP denote the edges of P and Einit the edges of the initial geometry Pinit , the split candidate e∗ is selected as 

e∗ = argmax 

> e∈EP

length (e) subject to dist (emid , Einit ) < ε (32) This ensures that auxiliary vertices are added only to original boundaries (outer walls or origi-nal holes) and never to the internal cut interfaces created by the agent, thereby preserving mesh conformity. 

5.1.3. Reward Function 

The reward function R(s, a) is a hierarchical sum of immediate action quality and terminal shape quality: 

Rtotal = Raction + ∑

> b∈Bnew

Routcome (b) (33) The action reward Raction evaluates the geometric validity of the cut before topological processing. It applies a Gaussian penalty when the angle between the two rays |θ1 − θ2| falls below 15 ◦, dis-couraging sliver cuts, and provides a positive signal based on the angle φ between each ray and the impacted wall normal, reaching its maximum at φ = 0 (orthogonal impact). The outcome reward Routcome evaluates the quality of each finalized block b by combining three metrics: 

Routcome (b) = w1 · S (b) + w2 · Ascore (b) + w3 · Rasp (b) (34) Here the convexity term S (b) = Area (b)/Area (ConvexHull (b)) measures how close the block is to its convex hull, the angle score Ascore penalizes internal angles below 30 ◦ while rewarding angles near 90 ◦, and the aspect ratio Rasp is defined as the ratio of the shortest to the longest edge. This reward formulation extends the methodology established for the block decomposition agent; however, the transition from a single-ray to a dual-ray action space necessitates a recalibration of the weighting terms. In particular, greater emphasis is placed on the convexity coefficient w1, since simultaneous dual-ray casting partitions the geometry into more complex sub-regions than single cuts, and the amplified convexity constraint is needed to ensure geometric stability and prevent the generation of non-convex blocks. 20 5.2. Hole Decomposition Agent 

> Figure 7: Vision-based architecture of the hole decomposition agent. Local and global binary masks are independently processed by dual convolutional encoders and fused into a shared latent representation. The Soft Actor-Critic policy predicts two cutting-ray directions used to partition hole-containing geometries into simpler meshable regions.

To tackle the specific topology of hole-containing geometries, a modified Soft Actor-Critic agent [18] is employed that relies exclusively on visual perception. Unlike the block decomposition agent, which benefits from hybrid vector-visual states, the hole decomposition agent operates from the Pole of Inaccessibility, a point strictly internal to the void (see Figure 7). In this context, relative coordinate vectors to boundary nodes are less informative than the holistic shape of the surrounding void, so the vector state encoder is discarded in favour of a pure vision-based architecture. This also marginally lightens the architecture, coming in at approx 1.3M parameters for the actor. The agent observes the state st as a dual-channel tensor It ∈ R2×H×W , stacking the local and global binary masks described in Section 5.1. These channels are processed by the same dual-stream CNN encoder used in the block decomposition agent: 

zlocal = fθloc (Ilocal t ), zglobal = fθglob (Iglobal t ), (35) where each fθ is a 3-layer convolutional neural network following the architecture of Mnih et al. [22] (64 filters, stride 2), followed by Layer Normalization. The resulting embeddings are concatenated and fused via a dense projection layer to form the state embedding: 

ht = ReLU (W f usion [zlocal ⊕ zglobal ]) . (36) This visual embedding ht serves as the sole input to the actor and critic networks. The pol-icy πφ (at |st ) outputs the mean and log-standard deviation for the dual-ray cutting angles at ∈ R2,and the learning process follows the standard SAC formulation (Eq. 2–7), utilizing automatic en-tropy tuning to prevent premature convergence to suboptimal cutting strategies. By relying solely on high-dimensional visual inputs, the agent learns to recognize geometric primitives, such as L-shapes or U-shapes, and orient the cut lines to maximize convexity, regardless of the specific vertex count or scale of the hole. 21 6. Results 

We begin by comparing the raw results of our meshing solution against the current state of the art, after which we demonstrate the output of each agent in the pipeline, as well as the combined results of the pipeline, and provide relevant numerical results. 

6.1. Curriculum Learning 

To demonstrate the importance of curriculum learning in achieving higher quality elements and faster convergence, we show a scaled score, calculated by multiplying average element quality by the number of elements generated by the meshing process, as well as element variance. The results displayed are averaged across 5 seeds each (see Figure 8).  

> (a) Scaled Score (higher is better) (b) Element variance (lower is better)
> Figure 8: Vision-based architecture of the hole decomposition agent. Local and global binary masks are independently processed by dual convolutional encoders and fused into a shared latent representation. The Soft Actor-Critic policy predicts two cutting-ray directions used to partition hole-containing geometries into simpler meshable regions.

As we can see, the consistent initial exposure to a simple square geometry allows for not only lower variance, thereby leading to a more consistent behavior, but also improves long-range plan-ning, which allows for completion of the mesh almost 100% of the time, which is not the case for the baseline method, as indicated by the scaled score. 

> Table 1: Mesh quality comparison between a baseline meshing agent (trained without curriculum learning) and the pro-posed curriculum-trained meshing agent, evaluated on identical test geometries and averaged across five independent random seeds. Quality is measured using the Scaled Jacobian metric, normalized to [0,1], where a value of 1.0 denotes a perfect square element. Higher mean and global minimum values, and lower variance, indicate superior mesh quality. The global minimum captures the worst single element produced across all test cases and is a critical indicator of mesh reliability.

Method Mean Variance Global Minimum 

Baseline 0.9432 0.007930 0.2644 Curriculum 0.9638 0.003192 0.4755 

The consistency in element generation and minimization of singular nodes is apparent, as is the consistent density of elements all across the inner region (see Figure 9). It is worth noting that despite the sub-par elements created by the agent in the baseline model, the environment still manages to recover a complete mesh, demonstrating the robustness of the recovery mechanisms built in. 22 (a) Baseline Training (b) Curriculum Training 

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison between a baseline agent and a curriculum-trained agent after 600k training steps. The curriculum-trained policy produces smoother advancing fronts, more uniform element sizing, and fewer irregular singular regions, demonstrating improved global planning and mesh completion behavior. 

6.2. Block Decomposition 

The block decomposition agent allows the agent to mesh geometries it could not by itself, and allows for parallel processing of the individual elements, thereby speeding up inference time and allowing for multiple advancing fronts. We showcase the result of both aspects here (see Figure 10). Note that the goal of the block decomposition agent is to eliminate large reflex angles that dis-rupt the meshing process while minimizing interference. This is because the increase in the number of blocks causes higher variance and a marginal decrease in element quality that the meshing agent otherwise smooths over. 

Table 2: Quantitative comparison of meshing performance on a complex concave geometry processed either directly by a single meshing agent (No Block Decomposition) or first partitioned by the block decomposition agent and then meshed in parallel (Block Decomposition). Meshing time is reported in wall-clock seconds on identical hardware. Element quality is measured using the Scaled Jacobian metric; higher is better for mean and global minimum, lower is better for variance. The results illustrate the trade-off between computational speed-up through parallelism and marginal increases in element quality variance introduced by internal block boundaries. 

Entity No Block Decomposition Block Decomposition 

Meshing time 61.87s 37.12s Average Element Quality 0.9577 0.9545 Element Quality Variance 0.0040 0.0055 Global Minimum 0.39 0.30 As we can see, there is a tradeoff that is to be made between parallelism and the consistency of elements generated. It is worth mentioning that the marginal increase in variance can be explained by a handful of sharp elements generated due to the new inner boundaries, and hence, the overall 23 (a) Incomplete Mesh (b) Block Decomposition (c) Complete Mesh 

Figure 10: Effect of block decomposition on meshing robustness. Without decomposition (left), the advancing-front meshing agent fails to fully resolve the geometry due to the presence of strong concavities. The block decomposi-tion agent (center) partitions the domain into simpler subregions, enabling successful generation of a complete all-quadrilateral mesh (right).   

> (a) No Block Decomposition (b) Block Decomposition (c) Parallel Mesh

Figure 11: Parallel meshing enabled through block decomposition. The original geometry (left) is first partitioned into independent subdomains (center), allowing multiple meshing agents to operate concurrently. The resulting mesh (right) demonstrates comparable element quality while significantly reducing overall meshing time. 

24 quality of the mesh still remains largely the same. The computational overhead of establishing parallel threads is superseded by its benefits, especially as the number of elements increases, during which a single agent begins to reach its limitations. Figure 11 illustrates the parallel meshing workflow that Table 2 quantifies. 

6.3. Hole Decomposition & 2D Meshing 

Here we demonstrate the hole decomposition agent, which is a purely visual agent trained on a dataset of ≈ 100,000 geometries with varying hole geometries. This has enabled a robust visual agent that splits a hole geometry into multiple filled geometries, which are then passed downstream into the block decomposition and finally, the meshing agent, which then stitches the individual blocks to create the final mesh. We now show the agent’s effectiveness on varying geometries, as well as compare the results against the Soft Actor Critic approach alone. 

> Figure 12: End-to-end demonstration of the proposed multi-agent meshing pipeline on geometries containing holes. The hole decomposition agent first partitions the geometry into simply connected regions, followed by block decom-position and downstream quadrilateral mesh generation. The final meshes preserve conformity while maintaining high element quality near complex topological features.

As we can see with these examples, the hole decomposer has developed a good understanding of lines to cast to create a good split that doesn’t cause any irregular elements. This allows for a good, clean split and ultimately a good final mesh. As you can see, the agent manages to cast good quality rays on 3 types of geometries that pertain to 3 different kinds of geometries. We now turn our attention to some quantitative comparisons of our pipeline Dmsh against the current state of the art method for RL-based meshing: FreeMesh-RL. As we can see in Table 3 and Figure 13, even in geometries where both FreeMesh-RL and Dmsh 

are applied, Dmsh manages to create better quality elements with lesser variance. In Domain 2, the advantage of the block decomposer present in the Dmsh pipeline is especially seen with the global minimum being 4 times higher than FreeMesh-RL. It is worth mentioning that for Domain 3, the geometry is modeled as a single convex block wrapping around the cavity to be successfully meshed with FreeMesh-RL, whereas the geometries 25 (a) Domain 1 (b) Domain 2 (c) Domain 3 

Figure 13: Qualitative comparison between FreeMesh-RL (top row) and the proposed Dmsh framework (bottom row) across three benchmark geometries. The proposed framework produces more uniform element distributions and im-proved handling of concave regions and hole geometries, particularly in domains requiring decomposition before advancing-front meshing. Table 3: Quantitative mesh quality comparison between FreeMesh-RL (current state-of-the-art reinforcement learning meshing method) and the proposed Dmsh framework across three benchmark 2D geometries of increasing topological complexity: Domain 1 (highly non-convex star-like geometry), Domain 2 (multi-spike planar domain with sharp con-cavities), and Domain 3 (planar geometry containing an internal hole, modelled as a single convex block for FreeMesh-RL and as separate exterior/interior regions for Dmsh ). Quality is measured using the Scaled Jacobian metric; higher average quality and global minimum, and lower variance, denote better mesh quality. Bold entries indicate the superior result for each metric and domain. Values are reported as FreeMesh-RL | Dmsh .

Quality (Scaled Jacobian) Domain 1 Domain 2 Domain 3 

Average Element Quality 0.8938 | 0.9054 0.9187 | 0.9257 0.8731 | 0.8887 

Element Quality Variance 0.0157 | 0.0138 0.0176 | 0.0127 0.0331 | 0.0131 

Global Minimum 0.0387 | 0.0001 0.0699 | 0.2792 0.0606 | 0.0388 26 were independently passed as exterior and interior elements to Dmsh . This distinction allows Dmsh 

to mesh geometries with multiple holes, as seen in Figure 12. Moreover, Dmsh is parallel by execution, allowing multiple agents to mesh the geometry at the same time, enabling exponentially faster inference as the domain size increases, thereby enabling scaling to tens of thousands of elements. This, combined with the contextual understanding of the hole and block decomposers, enables Dmsh to mesh 3D surfaces. 

6.4. Surface Meshes 

We extend these agents to a 3D surface by building a surface meshing pipeline that individually meshes each face of the 3D surface. To achieve this, we use the Python plug-in of the OpenCAS-CADE library, enabling us to mesh the parametric form of the boundary representation and convert the new nodes and node mappings back into spatial coordinates. We demonstrate this by mesh-ing a cube (14,586 elements), a cylinder (39,366 elements), and a bracket (12,244 elements) (see Figure 14). The robustness of 

Dmsh 

allows it to mesh almost any shape, with or without holes, in the parametric space, thereby creating an all-quad surface mesh. We tabulate the salient additions our framework provides on top of existing research. 

> Table 4: Feature-level capability comparison between FreeMesh-RL (current state-of-the-art RL-based all-quadrilateral meshing method) and the proposed
> Dmsh
> framework.

Capability FreeMesh-RL Dmsh 

All Quad ✓ ✓

Single Hole ✓∗ ✓

Block Decomposition × ✓

Multiple Holes × ✓

Parallel Meshing × ✓

Surface Meshing × ✓

*boundary modification required 

7. Conclusion 

In this work, we presented a fully autonomous framework for the generation of all-quadrilateral surface meshes, formulated as a multi-agent reinforcement learning problem involving three inter-acting agents. The proposed approach integrates computer vision-based representations to guide block and hole decomposition, effectively approximating heuristic strategies traditionally employed by human experts. Quantitative evaluation on established benchmark geometries demonstrates that the framework achieves performance comparable to state-of-the-art techniques, while offering improved generality and adaptability across diverse geometric configurations, including convex re-gions. Future research directions include scaling the learning framework through expanded training 27 Figure 14: Isometric, Top and Bottom views of a cube, a cylinder, and a bracket meshed by Dmsh 

28 datasets and introducing a Mixture of Experts (MoE) paradigm, wherein specialized agents could be trained to handle distinct classes of geometric features and topologies. Additionally, extending the formulation to volumetric mesh generation and incorporating parallelization strategies, such as domain decomposition, is expected to significantly enhance computational efficiency and scalabil-ity, enabling the generation of large-scale meshes with millions of elements. 

Acknowledgment 

Anirudh Kalyan would like to gratefully acknowledge the support provided by the DAAD KOSPIE scholarship for the academic year 2025–2026. 

References 

[1] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations, in: International Confer-ence on Learning Representations, 2021. [2] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218–229. doi:10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5. [3] S. Goswami, A. Bora, Y. Yu, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed deep neural operator net-works, in: Machine learning in modeling and simulation: methods and applications, Springer, 2023, pp. 219–254. [4] T. Kurth, S. Subramanian, P. Harrington, J. Pathak, M. Mardani, D. Hall, A. Miele, K. Kashinath, A. Anandkumar, FourCastNet: Accelerating global high-resolution weather forecasting using adaptive Fourier neural operators, in: Proceedings of the Platform for Ad-vanced Scientific Computing Conference, 2023, pp. 1–11. doi:10.1145/3592979.3593412. [5] N. McGreivy, A. Hakim, Weak baselines and reporting biases lead to overoptimism in ma-chine learning for fluid-related partial differential equations, Nature machine intelligence 6 (10) (2024) 1256–1269. [6] R. Roy, D. Nayak, S. Goswami, The Best of Both Worlds: Hybridizing Neural Operators and Solvers for Stable Long-Horizon Inference, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.19643 (2025). [7] W. Wang, M. Hakimzadeh, H. Ruan, S. Goswami, Time-marching neural operator–FE cou-pling: AI-accelerated physics modeling, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-neering 446 (2025) 118319. [8] J. P. Slotnick, A. Khodadoust, J. Alonso, D. Darmofal, W. Gropp, E. Lurie, D. J. Mavriplis, CFD vision 2030 study: A path to revolutionary computational aerosciences, Tech. Rep. NASA/CR-2014-218178, NASA (2014). [9] S. J. Owen, A survey of unstructured mesh generation technology, in: Proceedings of the 7th International Meshing Roundtable, 1998, pp. 239–267. 29 [10] D. Bommes, B. Lévy, N. Pietroni, E. Puppo, C. Silva, M. Tarini, D. Zorin, Quad-mesh generation and processing: A survey, Computer Graphics Forum 32 (6) (2013) 51–76. doi:10.1111/cgf.12014. [11] T. D. Blacker, M. B. Stephenson, Paving: A new approach to automated quadrilateral mesh generation, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 32 (4) (1991) 811– 847. doi:10.1002/nme.1620320410. [12] Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, P. K. Jimack, H. Wang, MeshingNet: A new mesh generation method based on deep learning, in: Computational Science – ICCS 2020, Vol. 12139 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2020, pp. 186–198. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-50420-5_14. [13] Z. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Li, X. Gu, N. Lei, What’s the situation with intelligent mesh generation: A survey and perspectives, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 30 (8) (2024) 4997–5017. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2023.3281781. [14] S. Owen, N. Brown, N. Chrisochoides, R. Garimella, X. Gu, F. Ledoux, N. Lei, R. Quadros, N. Ray, N. Winovich, Y. J. Zhang, A survey of AI methods for geometry preparation and mesh generation in engineering simulation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23719Accepted at the International Meshing Roundtable 2026 (2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2512.23719. [15] J. Pan, J. Huang, G. Cheng, Y. Zeng, Reinforcement learning for automatic quadrilat-eral mesh generation: A soft actor–critic approach, Neural Networks 157 (2023) 288–304. doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2022.10.022. [16] H. Tong, K. Qian, E. Halilaj, Y. J. Zhang, SRL-assisted AFM: Generating pla-nar unstructured quadrilateral meshes with supervised and reinforcement learning-assisted advancing front method, Journal of Computational Science 72 (2023) 102109. doi:10.1016/j.jocs.2023.102109. [17] Y. Zeng, G. Cheng, Knowledge-based free mesh generation of quadrilateral elements in two-dimensional domains, Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 8 (2008) 259 – 270. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8667.1993.tb00211.x. [18] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning 80 (2018) 1861–1870. [19] R. Bellman, Dynamic Programming, Princeton University Press, 1957. doi:10.1126/science.153.3731.34. [20] R. S. Sutton, A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2nd Edition, MIT Press, 2018. doi:10.1109/TNN.1998.712192. [21] C. J. C. H. Watkins, P. Dayan, Q-learning, Machine Learning 8 (3–4) (1992) 279–292. doi:10.1007/BF00992698. [22] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, et al., Human-level control through deep rein-forcement learning, Nature 518 (7540) (2015) 529–533. doi:10.1038/nature14236. 30 [23] R. J. Williams, Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-ment learning, Machine Learning 8 (3–4) (1992) 229–256. doi:10.1023/A:1022672621406. [24] V. R. Konda, J. N. Tsitsiklis, Actor-critic algorithms, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 12, 1999. [25] P. M. Knupp, Algebraic mesh quality metrics, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 23 (1) (2001) 193–218. doi:10.1137/S1064827500371499. [26] Z. Fan, R. Su, W. Zhang, Y. Yu, Hybrid actor-critic reinforcement learning in parameterized action space, in: Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence, 2019, pp. 2279–2285. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2019/316. [27] Y. Lin, X. Liu, Z. Zheng, Discretionary lane-change decision and control via parameterized soft actor-critic for hybrid action space (2024). arXiv:2402.15790. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.15790 

[28] O. Delalleau, M. Peter, E. Alonso, A. Logut, Discrete and continuous action representation for practical RL in video games, CoRR abs/1912.11077 (2019). arXiv:1912.11077. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.11077 

[29] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, J. Weston, Curriculum learning, in: Proceed-ings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2009, pp. 41–48. doi:10.1145/1553374.1553380. [30] B. C. DiPrete, R. V. Garimella, C. G. Cardona, N. Ray, Reinforcement learning for block decomposition of cad models (2023). arXiv:2302.11066. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.11066 

[31] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, M. Riedmiller, Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning (2013). arXiv:1312.5602. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602 

[32] J. Bromley, I. Guyon, Y. LeCun, E. Säckinger, R. Shah, Signature verification using a “Siamese” time delay neural network, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems, Vol. 6, 1993. doi:10.1142/S0218001493000339. 31