Title: Visual Swarm Navigation via Deep Reinforcement Learning and Evolutionary Hybrid Design

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06400v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 03:07:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
# Visual Swarm Navigation via Deep Reinforcement Learning and Evolutionary Hybrid Design 

Álvaro Díez a, ∗, Fidel Aznar a

> aDepartment of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of Alicante, Carretera San Vicente del Raspeig, San Vicente del Raspeig, 03690, Alicante, Spain

Abstract 

Swarm robotics presents a robust and cost-effective paradigm for advanced automation in complex, dynamic environ-ments, such as those encountered in search and rescue or environmental monitoring. A fundamental challenge for this field is the data-driven design of decentralized controllers capable of generating emergent collective behaviors. This paper proposes a novel, Artificial Intelligence (AI)-driven hybrid methodology for the automatic synthesis of swarm robotic controllers for autonomous visual navigation. This approach synergistically combines multi-agent reinforcement learning with neuro-evolutionary strategies, specifically leveraging implementations of the cross-entropy method and the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy to optimize a pre-trained individual navigation policy. The under-lying deep architecture is engineered for low-cost, resource-constrained platforms, utilizing a compact neural network that relies exclusively on monocular camera imagery. This vision-based design emphasizes computational and energy efficiency, a critical requirement for practical swarm deployments. Experiments, performed in a high-fidelity physics simulator, demonstrate that the resulting controllers enable robust and scalable collective exploration of diverse indoor environments. The controller trained using our cross-entropy method achieves superior exploration coverage, visiting 36.20% more regions compared to the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy. Critically, our best vision-based policy achieves exploration performance statistically comparable to traditional methods relying on more expensive dis-tance sensors, while delivering a significant 31.40% average reduction in energy consumption. These findings validate an effective and economically viable autonomous control system, establishing a path for deploying highly efficient collective intelligence in real-world engineering applications. 

Keywords: Swarm robotics, Intelligent control, Autonomous navigation, Deep learning, Reinforcement learning, Evolution strategies 

1. Introduction 

In recent decades, extensive research in robotics has fo-cused on developing control methods for autonomous and intelligent agents. Roboticists have implemented strate-gies aimed at solving tasks traditionally performed by hu-mans in complex environments (Mukhlish et al., 2018), characterized by high uncertainty and dynamism. Multi-agent systems, particularly swarm robotics, have emerged as a promising and cost-effective paradigm for addressing these challenges. Drawing inspiration from the collective behaviors observed in social animals, swarm robotics aims to develop decentralized control methods for multiple sim-ple, autonomous agents that rely on local sensing and com-munication. This approach offers a valuable alternative to tradi-tional strategies that depend on a single, sophisticated, and expensive robot, which may be inefficient or prone      

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: alvaro.diez@ua.es (Álvaro Díez ),
> fidel@ua.es (Fidel Aznar )

to complete failure in high-risk operational environments (Mukhlish et al., 2018). For a swarm to function effec-tively, its members must self-organize through coordina-tion and cooperation, enabling the emergence of robust, flexible, and scalable collective behaviors. This allows the system to maintain operational integrity despite agent loss (Mukhlish et al., 2018), adapt to changing environmental configurations (Brambilla et al., 2013), and perform di-verse tasks effectively regardless of the swarm’s size (Cher-aghi et al., 2021). The design of controllers that facilitate such emergent behaviors is a significant challenge. While traditional behavior-based design methods have been employed, they are often labor-intensive and result in solutions tailored to specific problems in static environments (Mukhlish et al., 2018). This approach involves manually modeling, im-plementing, analyzing, and refining individual robot be-haviors through iterative trial and error until satisfac-tory collective behavior emerges (Brambilla et al., 2013). Consequently, automatic design methods, primarily based on Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Kaelbling et al., 1996) and Evolutionary Computation (EC) (Bäck and Schwefel, arXiv:2610.06400v1 [cs.RO] 5 Oct 2026 1996), are strongly advocated for their ability to gener-ate more adaptive solutions without explicit modeling of the problem or the desired collective behaviors (Mukhlish et al., 2018). Recent advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI) have introduced powerful, large-scale generative models that are setting new benchmarks in robotics. Among the most prominent are transformers, such as Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT), which leverage attention mechanisms to process complex data sequences (Feuer-riegel et al., 2023). However, this power comes at a sig-nificant cost. These models are exceptionally demand-ing, requiring massive datasets for training and consisting of an enormous number of parameters. Their complex-ity in terms of memory, processing, and energy consump-tion makes them unsuitable for the low-cost, resource-constrained platforms typically used in swarm robotics. These limitations underscore the need for more efficient and pragmatic architectures specifically designed for the constraints of swarm robotics. This paper charts a different course, diverging from the trend of developing computationally expensive mod-els. We propose a hybrid automatic design method for swarm robotics that uses Evolution Strategies (ES) to ad-dress Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) (Ha and Tang, 2022) problems in autonomous navigation. Compared to traditional DRL algorithms, evolution strategies are highly parallelizable, scalable, and demonstrate greater robustness against the common challenges of temporal credit assignment and solution space exploration (Sali-mans et al., 2017), making them particularly suitable for training multi-agent systems. Our approach is built on an efficient deep architecture, demonstrating that robust, flexible, and scalable collective navigation is achievable without massive computational overhead, an indispensable requirement for the deploy-ment of swarm systems in the real world. This method is specifically engineered to learn collective visual navigation policies, enabling homogeneous swarm agents to perform collision-free exploration in uncertain and dynamic envi-ronments using only low-cost monocular cameras (Kolar et al., 2020). While recent centralized visual-inertial Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems have achieved remarkable mapping richness and localization accuracy through cloud-based multi-robot feature fusion (Liu et al., 2025b), such advanced paradigms inherently require sub-stantial computational and communicational bandwidth. For swarm applications prioritizing hardware simplicity, our decentralized, map-less (Güzel, 2013) strategy offers a complementary approach that significantly reduces imple-mentation costs and energy requirements, making it highly viable for resource-constrained scenarios. To validate our approach, this work addresses five fun-damental research questions: 1. How effectively can a hybrid automatic design method combining deep reinforcement learning with evolution strategies generate functional swarm robotic controllers for autonomous visual navigation? 2. What level of stability do these automatically generated controllers maintain when subjected to sensory pertur-bations? 3. How do the controllers respond to unforeseen varia-tions in environmental conditions not encountered dur-ing training? 4. What impact does varying the size of the robotic swarm have on the efficacy of the developed controllers? 5. Can vision-based swarm controllers achieve perfor-mance comparable to traditional methods that employ more expensive and heavier distance sensors? The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Sec-tion 2 reviews the most relevant research directions in the automatic design of swarm robotic controllers. Section 3 presents the formal specification of our deep reinforcement learning problem. Section 4 details our training method-ology for learning collective visual navigation behaviors, including two specific implementations of different evolu-tion strategies. Section 5 compares and discusses the ex-perimental results achieved by our two swarm controllers. Section 6 evaluates and analyzes the robustness, flexibility, and scalability of our controllers. Finally, Section 7 syn-thesizes our conclusions, addresses the limitations of this work, and outlines future research directions. 

2. Related Work 

The automatic design of swarm robotic controllers is a pivotal research area dedicated to generating the ro-bust, flexible, and scalable collective behaviors required for real-world applications. This paradigm seeks to automate the complex process of engineering emergent behaviors, significantly reducing the manual effort traditionally re-quired by designers (Brambilla et al., 2013). Our research contributes to this field by proposing a hybrid method-ology that synergizes learning-based and evolution-based techniques. Specifically, we present a soft computing ap-proach that employs Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn-ing (MARL) and neuro-evolution to produce swarm con-trollers for autonomous visual navigation applications. Multi-agent reinforcement learning comprises tech-niques commonly used for the automatic, learning-based design of swarm controllers. This paradigm can be concep-tualized as a reward optimization process, where a specific function grants rewards to individuals within a multi-agent system to guide their learning (Kuckling, 2023). We ex-plore this variant of reinforcement learning in greater de-tail in Subsection 2.1. In parallel, neuro-evolution represents one of the earli-est and most studied techniques for automatic controller design in swarm robotics. This approach involves optimiz-ing the parameters, and potentially the topology, of one or more artificial neural networks with respect to a given 2objective function (Kuckling, 2023). We examine this evo-lutionary computation approach in Subsection 2.2. 

2.1. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 

Multi-Agent reinforcement learning extends traditional RL principles to systems comprising multiple interact-ing individuals (Mukhlish et al., 2018). Whereas a con-ventional reinforcement learning agent learns behavior through trial-and-error interactions with its environment (Brambilla et al., 2013), the multi-agent variant involves agents that interact with both the environment and each other (Mukhlish et al., 2018). In recent years, deep rein-forcement learning has become a prominent technique for addressing collective autonomous navigation problems in swarm robotics. Hüttenrauch et al. (2019) proposed a MARL approach based on the Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) training algorithm (Schulman et al., 2015). Their method was validated in two classic multi-robot scenarios: a ren-dezvous task requiring agents to gather at an arbitrary lo-cation, and a pursuit-evasion task where a group of agents must cooperatively capture one or more targets. Similar to our system, their swarm was homogeneous; however, their agents relied on local communication to exchange task-relevant information. This is a key distinction from our approach, which employs a communication-free frame-work to enhance system simplicity and robustness. More recently, Batra et al. (2021) employed the popu-lar Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm (Schul-man et al., 2017) to train decentralized control policies for drone swarms. Their MARL process, conducted in re-alistic simulated environments, successfully generated co-ordinated flocking behaviors that enabled the drones to maintain various formations while avoiding collisions with each other and with dynamic obstacles. Critically, the col-lective behaviors learned in simulation were successfully transferred to multiple small, real-world drones with lim-ited computational resources, demonstrating the feasibil-ity of deploying learned policies on hardware-constrained platforms, a central objective of our own research. A study by Bloom et al. (2022) is also of particular rele-vance for its development of a MARL method for collective object transport, one of the three principal navigation be-haviors in swarm robotics alongside coordinated movement and collective exploration (Brambilla et al., 2013). Con-sistent with our approach, their method utilized neural networks with few fully connected layers to learn collision-free navigation policies for a swarm of wheeled robots with differential drive (Stefek et al., 2020). A key difference, however, is that their agents perceived the environment through distance sensors, whereas our work addresses the more challenging task of navigation using only monocular camera imagery. Recent literature continues to expand the capabilities of PPO-based algorithms for complex spatial coordination. For instance, Bezerra et al. (2025) proposed a decentral-ized framework that extends the Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO) algorithm to address dy-namic coalition formation in multi-robot task allocation. Although their primary focus lies in task assignment rather than explicitly in swarm robotic control, their framework intrinsically governs multi-robot spatial navigation, utiliz-ing an end-to-end Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (LeCun et al., 2015) based on a U-Net architecture to pro-cess local grid observations and plan collision-free paths. While this MAPPO-based approach is highly effective in dynamic environments, it relies on explicit intention shar-ing among agents and uses sophisticated convolutional ar-chitectures to process spatial action maps. In a similar vein, other recent advancements have sought to enhance the adaptability of learning-based mod-els by integrating them with classical rule-based algo-rithms. For example, the adaptive cooperative path plan-ning method proposed by Liu et al. (2025a) successfully utilized MARL to dynamically optimize rotational artifi-cial potential fields, achieving efficient, collision-free navi-gation and effectively overcoming local minima in contin-uous action spaces. Building upon these broad advances in multi-agent learning and hybrid optimization, our methodology ex-plores an alternative paradigm: achieving robust collec-tive navigation through a strictly communication-free ap-proach, utilizing a lightweight, purely reactive percep-tion and control architecture engineered specifically for severely resource-constrained platforms where heavy com-putational and communication overheads might be pro-hibitive. The automatic design methods discussed in this sub-section typically generate swarm behaviors through online reinforcement learning, which relies on numerous direct in-teractions between the agents and their environment. In contrast, deep architectures based on modern generative models, such as the generative pre-trained transformer, are often trained using offline reinforcement learning to miti-gate the computational complexity of the online training phase. This offline paradigm utilizes data collected from a previously learned behavioral policy to find a new, optimal policy (Boige et al., 2023). Notable examples of such archi-tectures include Decision Transformers (DTs) and Control Transformers (CTs). A decision transformer solves RL problems through the generative modeling of trajectories, which consist of se-quences of states, actions, and rewards (Meng et al., 2023), and can be adapted for multi-agent autonomous naviga-tion applications. The control transformer, a variant of the former, seeks to improve generalization capabilities in tasks such as robotic navigation (Lawson and Qureshi, 2023). However, both decision and control transformers currently feature architectures that demand significantly greater computational resources compared to the models typically used in automatic swarm controller design, and particularly in comparison to the low-cost solution pro-posed in this study. 32.2. Neuro-Evolution 

Neuro-evolution draws inspiration from Darwinian prin-ciples of natural selection and evolution, combining EC techniques with artificial neural networks to optimize net-work parameters (Brambilla et al., 2013). In robotics, this approach treats neural networks as black-box controllers and generally requires no heuristic domain-specific infor-mation about the problem to be solved (Kuckling, 2023). Neuro-evolution has proven highly effective for generating a wide array of swarm behaviors, including pattern for-mation, collective transport, task allocation, and foraging (Mukhlish et al., 2018). Within the broader field of evolutionary computation, our research focuses on evolution strategies, a family of black-box optimization algorithms that function as heuris-tic search processes inspired by natural evolution (Sali-mans et al., 2017). For this study, we selected two promi-nent ES algorithms, the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubinstein, 1999) and the Covariance Matrix Adapta-tion Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen and Oster-meier, 2001), valued for their straightforward implementa-tion and minimal hyperparameter tuning requirements. The cross-entropy method is a stochastic, adaptive op-timization algorithm that can be classified as an evolution strategy due to its operational similarities with such tech-niques (Nguyen et al., 2021). CEM has been applied to various single-agent (Nguyen et al., 2021) and multi-agent robotic control systems. For instance, Fan et al. (2018) utilized this EC technique to evaluate a swarm of low-cost drones in two complex scenarios: a cooperative attack on a defended enemy base and a confrontation between two autonomous aerial teams. Similar to our methodology, they employed a neural network controller whose parame-ters were optimized using an ES-based method in a realis-tic simulation featuring agent interactions, varying initial conditions, and Gaussian noise (Yogesh et al., 2017). How-ever, their network contained three hidden layers, whereas our work demonstrates the efficacy of an even more com-pact single-layer model. CMA-ES, one of today’s most effective evolution strate-gies, is notable for its advanced capabilities in searching the solution space (Hasselmann et al., 2021). Its effective-ness in designing swarm robotic controllers was recently validated by Hasselmann et al. (2021), whose work in-volved generating behaviors like aggregation and foraging and evaluating them in both simulation and on physical robots. Their comparative analysis confirmed the com-petitive performance of the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy against other neuro-evolutionary meth-ods, including the Exponential Natural Evolution Strategy (xNES) (Glasmachers et al., 2010), the Neuro-Evolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT) algorithm (Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002), and the basic EvoStick approach (Francesca et al., 2014), reinforcing its suitability as a pow-erful tool for the automatic design of collective behaviors. Building upon the foundational principles of algorithms like NEAT, which seek to optimize both the structural ar-chitecture and the synaptic weights of neural networks, recent advancements have continued to explore this dual optimization paradigm for decentralized control. For ex-ample, a recent study by Hiraga (2026) proposed a topol-ogy and weight neuro-evolutionary method designed to foster social learning within robotic swarms. By utiliz-ing a mutation-based evolving artificial neural network, their approach allows robots to dynamically alter their controller’s architecture through local interactions. While evolving the topology offers theoretical flexibility and mitigates the need for manual network design, it inher-ently expands the search space and introduces significant computational overhead. In stark contrast, our methodol-ogy deliberately limits the evolutionary search space to the synaptic weights of an ultra-compact, fixed-topology con-troller. By coupling this static, highly efficient control pol-icy with a deeply compressed representation of the visual input space, our approach bypasses the severe computa-tional demands of topology mutation, guaranteeing rapid convergence and strict architectural efficiency for resource-constrained, vision-based navigation. 

3. Problem Specification 

This section provides a formal specification for the chal-lenge of learning swarm robotic controllers designed for autonomous navigation, framing it as a problem of deep reinforcement learning. To properly address the complex-ities of a multi-agent system, this problem is modeled not as a standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1996), but as a Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP), following similar approaches in the literature (Amato et al., 2013; Bloom et al., 2022). This more advanced framework is necessary due to the inherent limitations of the traditional MDP for-mulation in multi-agent scenarios, particularly its inability to adequately handle partial observability and the curse of dimensionality, which are defining challenges in the auto-matic design of swarm robotic controllers (Bloom et al., 2022; Kuckling, 2023). We therefore define this process as the tuple 

⟨E , S, O, A, P, R⟩ . Within this formal structure, E rep-resents the finite set of embodied agents comprising the swarm; S is the finite set of global system states; O con-stitutes the finite set of local observations available to each agent; A is the finite set of individual actions an agent can perform; P corresponds to the probabilistic state transi-tion function governing the system’s dynamics; and R is the reward function that guides the learning process. Each of these components is formally specified in the subsections that follow. 

3.1. Embodied Agents 

To facilitate the learning of effective collective naviga-tion behaviors within a controlled and repeatable setting, we first generate a set of J virtual agents, denoted as 4E = {ej }Jj=1 . This set constitutes a multi-agent system, specifically designed to function as a swarm robotic sys-tem. Utilizing a proprietary high-fidelity physics simula-tor, each agent in the system is modeled as a low-cost dif-ferential drive vehicle, based on the physical specifications of a Makeblock mBot Ranger 1 robot of reduced dimen-sions. Our virtual agents are considered embodied, a term sig-nifying that they exist within a defined environment and interact with it through a physical body equipped with sensors for perception and actuators for movement. For perception, each agent is equipped with a single embed-ded monocular camera, which captures local observations of the environment in the form of Red, Green, Blue (RGB) images. For actuation, each agent executes navigation ac-tions by independently controlling two motors, each driv-ing one of the two wheels. 

3.2. State Space 

In our reinforcement learning formulation, the state space, denoted as S = {st}Tt=1 , provides a complete char-acterization of the global state of the entire system at any given time instant t, up to a maximum episode duration 

T . This global state encompasses all relevant informa-tion about both the environment and the individual states of every agent within it. A critical feature of the Dec-POMDP framework is that individual agents do not have access to this complete state space; their knowledge is lim-ited to their own local perceptions. Instead, the global state space S contains variables that are essential for man-aging the learning process and the simulation itself. One of the most critical variables in our state space is the count of agent collisions at any given time, as it plays a fundamental role in defining the termination conditions for each learning episode. An episode is concluded either when the maximum time T is elapsed or when the total number of agent collisions surpasses a predefined threshold 

C. Other variables vital for the simulation include the precise positions and orientations of all mobile agents and the locations of static obstacles within the environment. The environment itself is a realistic digital twin of an indoor corridor at a real-world university, rendered using the same high-fidelity physics simulator employed for the agents. This synthetic environment is rich with realistic details, including random variations in lighting conditions, objects with diverse surface textures, and multiple static obstacles such as columns, walls, doors, and waste bins. Since this is a multi-agent reinforcement learning prob-lem, the environment is inherently non-stationary (Bloom et al., 2022; Kuckling, 2023), as the agents themselves are considered dynamic obstacles from the perspective of their peers. 

> 1https://www.makeblock.com/pages/mbot-ranger-robot-building-kit

3.3. Observation Space 

As established in Section 1, each robot in the swarm operates with only local sensing capabilities and without any form of inter-agent communication. Within our Dec-POMDP formulation, this means that each mobile agent 

ej perceives only a partial observation ojt of the global state 

st at every time step t. Consequently, each agent operates based on its own individual subset of observations. The complete observation space for the system, O, is therefore the union of all these individual subsets, which can be for-mally expressed as O = {O j }Jj=1 = {ojt }Tt=1 . This decen-tralized approach to observation is crucial, as it effectively overcomes two major challenges inherent to applying con-ventional MDPs to multi-robot systems: the inability to model the partially observable nature of the environment from an individual agent’s perspective (Bloom et al., 2022) and the curse of dimensionality (Kuckling, 2023), which would cause the state space to grow intractably with the number of agents. Discovering effective behaviors through multi-agent re-inforcement learning typically requires a vast number of interactions between the agents and their environment, which renders the training phase computationally inten-sive (Ye et al., 2023). To mitigate this challenge and opti-mize for both training and inference efficiency, our solution incorporates a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2013). This deep neural network, denoted as G and detailed in Fig. 1, is responsible for perception. Its primary function is to compress each high-dimensional local observation ojt into a low-dimensional visual repre-sentation zjt . Specifically, the VAE’s encoder, through the function zjt = g(xjt ), transforms a preprocessed 64x64 pixel RGB image xjt into a dense latent vector containing just 32 real-valued elements. This aggressive compression is a cornerstone of our low-cost architectural design, as it enables the use of an excep-tionally compact control module with very few trainable parameters. This design choice stands in stark contrast to the current trend of employing large-scale generative mod-els like transformers, which would necessitate processing high-dimensional image data directly, thereby imposing a computational complexity orders of magnitude higher and making them unsuitable for resource-constrained swarm agents. In addition to compression, the autoencoder’s decoder can also perform the inverse operation, recon-structing the input image xjt from its latent vector zjt via 

x′jt = g′(zjt ).

3.4. Action Space 

Following the same decentralized principle applied to the observation space, the system’s action space is partitioned into multiple subsets of individual actions ajt . Each action is executed independently by its respective agent ej at each time instant t of an episode. This partitioning, formally expressed as A = {A j }Jj=1 = {ajt }Tt=1 , is a crucial strategy to prevent the combinatorial explosion of the joint action space that would otherwise occur in a multi-agent system. 5Given that our problem domain is autonomous robotic navigation, each action is selected from a discrete set of four fundamental navigation commands: move forward, turn right, turn left, and stop. Thus, any action ajt

performed by an agent at any given time must corre-spond to one of these commands, formally expressed as 

ajt ∈ { af orward , a right , a lef t , a stop }.

3.5. Transition Function 

In the context of multi-agent reinforcement learning, a transition from the current system state st to the subse-quent state st+1 is driven by the collective actions of the individuals within the environment. In our system, each robot ej independently performs an action ajt based on the compressed visual representation zjt derived from its local observation ojt . This dynamic can be modeled by the prob-abilistic transition function P = ( st+1 |st, a jt ), which maps the current state and an agent’s action to a distribution over the next possible states. We implement this function using a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) (Pierson and Gash-ler, 2017), denoted as H, which serves as the autonomous navigation controller. This neural network is tasked with automatically mapping the compressed perceptual inputs (i.e. , zjt ) to the appropriate control outputs ( i.e. , ajt ). The MLP network H is the core component that we aim to optimize through our DRL process. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the controller receives the compact 32-element feature map zjt generated by the VAE G. This efficient input representation allows the navigation controller to be exceptionally compact and lightweight. The design, which features a single hidden layer, results in a model with 3704 trainable parameters. This makes the online MARL pro-cess computationally viable, a stark contrast to the de-mands of larger architectures. For context, recent research in reinforcement learning has utilized relatively small transformers for simpler con-trol tasks, such as the popular Half Cheetah environment (Wawrzyński, 2009), which uses a flat vector of only 18 real values as its observation space. Even in that less complex scenario, the transformer model comprised approximately 7 million parameters (Boige et al., 2023). Attempting to apply such an architecture directly to our visual navigation problem, where observations are high-dimensional 64x64 RGB images and the system involves multiple interacting robots, would necessitate a vastly larger and more compu-tationally intensive model, rendering an online training ap-proach intractable. Our deliberate choice of a lightweight VAE-MLP architecture is therefore a pragmatic solution tailored to the specific constraints of swarm robotics. The MLP’s architecture includes an output layer that calculates the membership probabilities, yjt =(yf orward , y right , y lef t , y stop )jt , for each of the four possi-ble navigation commands based on the input latent vector 

zjt . Consequently, the MLP H functions as a classifica-tion neural network, with its operation summarized by the function yjt = h(zjt ). This reactive navigation con-troller (Xiao et al., 2022), in conjunction with the percep-tual VAE model G, forms the microscopic model (Bram-billa et al., 2013) of our swarm robotic system. The inter-play between this microscopic decision-making level and the emergent macroscopic system behavior, denoted gener-ically as πcollective , is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

3.6. Reward Function 

In MARL processes designed for swarm robotics, agents typically receive specific reward values at the individual level. These individual rewards are then aggregated to calculate a global reward, which serves as an evaluation of the swarm’s overall collective performance. As noted by Kuckling (2023), to be effective, learning in swarm robotics must occur at the individual level. Accordingly, our reward function R is structured to divide the global reward into distinct individual rewards, rjt , which are distributed to each agent ej based on the specific action ajt it executed at time t. This approach directly addresses the spatial credit assignment problem, a common challenge in multi-agent learning and swarm robotics where it can be difficult to determine which agent’s action contributed to a particular outcome (Kuckling, 2023). Our automatic design method is flexible and can accom-modate various reward functions, allowing for subtle mod-ifications to be made through manual credit assignment to promote different collective behaviors. The desired swarm behavior is contingent on the specific task the robots must learn to solve; for instance, aggregation behavior is cru-cial for target tracking, whereas dispersion is valuable for collective exploration. As the focus of this paper is on autonomous exploration, our goal is to learn an effective policy for map-less visual exploration of a dynamic envi-ronment, based on reactive detection and avoidance of ob-stacles. The reward function designed to elicit this policy is defined as follows: 

R =



5, if ajt = af orward ,

0.5, if ajt = aright or ajt = alef t ,

−1, if ajt = astop ,

−10 , if collision. 

(1) It is crucial to clarify the semantic definition of “exploration” within the context of our proposed task. The objective is not optimal, single-pass spatial cover-age ( e.g. , area mapping), where revisiting a previously explored sector would be considered an algorithmic inef-ficiency. Instead, the learned collective policy is intended to operate fundamentally as an emergent, continuous wan-dering behavior. This behavior is driven by reactive open-space detection and dynamic obstacle avoidance. Because the swarm must autonomously explore with-out a predefined terminal destination, introducing a goal-oriented reward would inherently contradict the funda-mental paradigm of this decentralized application. Conse-quently, the true effectiveness of the learned policies is not 6...

> Variance Vector (32) Dense (4) ·Activation = Softmax Preprocessed Observation (64x64x3) Convolution (64x64x64) ·Filters = 64 ·Kernel = (3x3) ·Stride = (1x1) ·Activation = ReLU MaxPooling (32x32x64) ·Pool = (2x2) ·Stride = (2x2) Convolution (32x32x128) ·Filters = 128 ·Kernel = (3x3) ·Stride = (1x1) ·Activation = ReLU MaxPooling (16x16x128) ·Pool = (2x2) ·Stride = (2x2) Flatten (32768) Dense (32768) Reshape (16x16x128) UpSampling (32x32x128) ·Size = (2x2) Convolution (32x32x128) ·Filters = 128 ·Kernel = (3x3) ·Stride = (1x1) ·Activation = ReLU
> UpSampling (64x64x128) ·Size = (2x2) Convolution (64x64x64) ·Filters = 64 ·Kernel = (3x3) ·Stride = (1x1) ·Activation = ReLU Convolution (64x64x3) ·Filters = 3 ·Kernel = (1x1) ·Stride = (1x1) ·Activation = Sigmoid Input (32) Dense (100) ·Activation = ReLU Forward [0, 1] Reconstructed Observation (64x64x3)
> Mean Vector (32) Latent Vector (32)

zjt = g(xjt)

> ENCODER

xjt

x'jt = g'( zjt)

> DECODER

b(x jt)

d(x jt)

> CONVOLUTIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER

yjt = h(zjt)CLASSIFICATION NEURAL NETWORK CONTROLLER 

1 32 

> ...

211 100 3 4

> Turn Right [0, 1] Turn Left [0, 1] Stop [0, 1]

Figure 1: Microscopic model architecture. This figure details the layer structure of the convolutional variational autoencoder (bottom), which handles perception by compressing high-dimensional images, and the lightweight classification neural network (top), which serves as the controller for action selection. 

demonstrated by reaching a specific target, but rather by maximizing long-term spatial coverage and overall system survivability. The specific coefficients and relative weights of our re-ward function were derived through an empirical tuning process during a preliminary pilot phase. In this phase, alternative reward formulations were systematically eval-uated to assess the sensitivity of the policy. We observed that the MARL process is highly sensitive to the balance between collision and stop penalties. For instance, relax-ing the collision penalty reliably resulted in reckless explo-ration. Conversely, minimizing the stop penalty induced overly stagnant behaviors, as agents preferred to remain stationary rather than risk navigating unfamiliar areas. Because these alternative formulations failed to meet the minimum viability criteria for the emergence of effective collision-free collective behaviors, they were not advanced to the full, computationally intensive evolutionary train-ing and evaluation phases. Furthermore, turning actions are rewarded to a significantly lesser extent than forward advancement to prevent the emergence of unintended poli-cies. Although turning commands are vital for collision avoidance, our preliminary studies demonstrated that re-warding them excessively causes the robots to rotate con-tinuously on their own axis, leading to severe oscillatory behaviors and drastically reducing the spatial regions vis-ited by the swarm. The slight penalty for stopping serves to break stagna-tion and encourage continuous movement, while still pro-viding a viable emergency action to avoid the catastrophic 7Update of the policy πcollective 

Update of the policy πcollective 

Update of the policy πcollective 

Update of the policy πcollective 

o1t

Local Observation (64x64x3) Compressed Observation (32) e1

Embodied Agent Convolutional Variational Autoencoder 

1 . . . 32 

z1t

Classification Neural Network 

a1t

o2t

e2

1 . . . 32 

z2t

a2t

o3t

e3

1 . . . 32 

z3t

a3t

o4t

e4

1 . . . 32 

z4t

a4t

Individual Action 

Encoder Encoder Encoder Controller Controller Controller Controller 

r1t

r2t

r3t

r4t

Individual Reward Global State of the System 

st+1 

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Environment Encoder MICROSCOPIC LEVEL MACROSCOPIC LEVEL Figure 2: Relationship between the microscopic and macroscopic models of the proposed swarm robotic system. The parameters of the collective navigation policy are updated based on the individual rewards assigned to agents for actions they execute in response to their partial observations of the environment. 

collision penalty. The presented configuration encapsu-lates the optimal heuristic balance found to successfully solve the exploration-exploitation trade-off, facilitating a robust policy that, as demonstrated in our experiments, generalizes effectively across different swarm sizes and en-vironmental conditions. To conclude the formal problem specification, Table 1 consolidates not only the defined reward structure but all foundational components comprising our Dec-POMDP framework. By systematically summarizing the state, ob-servation, and action spaces alongside the transition dy-namics, this explicit delineation establishes the rigorous mathematical baseline required before transitioning to the evolutionary training methodology in the subsequent sec-8tion.  

> Table 1: Systematic summary of the Dec-POMDP formulation for our swarm exploration task.

Component Definition Implementation 

Agents E Homogeneous swarm of J

robots operating under a fully decentralized, map-less paradigm. States S Unobservable global variables ( e.g. , time steps 

T per episode and collision termination threshold C). Observations O Local partial images: 64x64 RGB camera feed per agent, processed into a 32-element latent vector by the VAE G.Actions A Discrete reactive navigation space: ajt ∈{af orward , a right , a lef t , a stop }.Transition P Mapping of actions ajt and system states st to new states st+1 through the MLP H.Reward R Emergent heuristic scalar evaluating the transition: move forward ( +5 ), turn (+0 .5), stop ( −1), and collision ( −10 ). 

4. Training Methodology 

This section details the two-tiered training methodology employed to develop the swarm robotic system, address-ing both the microscopic and macroscopic levels. First, in Subsection 4.1, we describe the process for learning a ro-bust individual navigation policy, which forms the founda-tion for each agent’s autonomous capabilities. This micro-scopic model, comprising a perceptual module and a con-trol module, is trained using established machine learning paradigms: unsupervised and supervised learning (Shan-thamallu et al., 2017). Our approach, similar to that of Ha and Schmidhu-ber (2018), synergizes reinforcement learning and evolu-tion strategies, utilizing a multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing reward function as an objective function for a neuro-evolutionary algorithm. Additionally, we leverage the pre-trained individual policy as a starting point for yielding emergent swarm behaviors. This critical transition from isolated navigation to the evolutionary optimization of emergent collective behaviors is formalized and compre-hensively detailed in Subsection 4.2. 

4.1. Individual Navigation Policy 

The initial phase focuses on training the microscopic model, which consists of the perception and control mod-ules responsible for each individual agent’s reactive naviga-tion. This process yields a foundational policy, πindividual ,capable of collision-free navigation based on visual input. 

4.1.1. Convolutional Variational Autoencoder 

The perceptual module of our architecture is a convo-lutional variational autoencoder, denoted as G. We train this model through a combination of unsupervised learning and Bayesian variational inference (Kingma and Welling, 2013). This paradigm was deliberately chosen for its ca-pacity to learn a smooth, well-structured latent space that captures salient environmental features while promoting generalization. The probabilistic nature of the VAE allows for an explicit representation of uncertainty, yielding more robust visual features that can adapt to the variations and unpredictability of real-world environments. The training objective is twofold: to learn an en-coder function, g, that compresses high-dimensional ob-servations, {xi}Mi=1 , into low-dimensional latent vectors, 

{zi}Mi=1 , and a decoder function, g′, that reconstructs the original images from these latent vectors. To achieve this, we minimize a specialized loss function based on (Bank et al., 2023): 

LG =

vuut 1

M

> M

X

> i=1

(xi − g′(zi)) 2 + KL, (2) where the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (Bank et al., 2023) term is defined as: 

KL = divergence (N (b(xi), d (xi)) , N (0 , I )) . (3) The loss function LG consists of two critical compo-nents. The first term is the reconstruction loss, quantified as the root mean squared error between the original images 

xi and the decoded images g′(zi). The second term, the Kullback-Leibler divergence, acts as a regularization mech-anism. It measures the discrepancy between the distribu-tion learned by the encoder, parameterized by mean b(xi)

and variance d(xi) vectors, and a standard normal distri-bution N (0 , I ). By penalizing deviations from this prior, the KL divergence encourages the model to learn a con-tinuous and organized latent space, which is instrumental in preventing overfitting and enhancing the generalization capabilities of the learned policy. The training dataset X

consists of 45225 synthetic 64x64 pixel RGB images ( i.e. ,

M = 45225 ), acquired from the monocular camera of a single virtual agent within our simulated corridor. The selection of a variational autoencoder over alterna-tive lightweight feature extractors, such as standard de-terministic convolutional neural networks, is fundamen-tally driven by the specific mathematical and structural requirements of neuro-evolutionary control tasks. While a 9standard CNN provides efficient dimensionality reduction, its deterministic mapping often yields a highly non-linear or fragmented latent space. In contrast, the probabilistic nature of the VAE constructs a continuous, regularized, and smooth latent manifold. This probabilistic represen-tation offers a crucial advantage for the subsequent evolu-tionary optimization phase: a smooth state space ensures that the stochastic weight mutations introduced by our evolution strategies into the controller translate into pre-dictable, continuous variations in the agent’s action space. Consequently, this mitigates the risk of catastrophic be-havioral jumps and instability that frequently occur when evolving control policies over irregular deterministic rep-resentations. Additionally, the characteristic lack of sharpness in VAE outputs provides a substantial advantage for embodied navigation by acting as an intrinsic regularization mech-anism. The mapping of complex, high-dimensional vi-sual data into a compact 32-element latent representa-tion inherently discards high-frequency, domain-specific noise, like detailed surface textures. At the same time, the process guarantees the retention of critical low-frequency structural cues, such as corridor layouts and obstacle boundaries. Ultimately, prioritizing these invariant geo-metric features over superficial visual details plays a cru-cial role in bridging the sim-to-real domain gap. 

4.1.2. Classification Neural Network 

The control module, a lightweight multi-layer percep-tron denoted as H, is trained via supervised learning to form the individual reactive navigation policy, πindividual .The training process utilizes the compact 32-element la-tent vectors {zi}Mi=1 generated by the VAE’s pre-trained encoder as inputs. The corresponding ground-truth labels, 

L = {li}Mi=1 , are one-hot encoded vectors (Dahouda and Joe, 2021) representing one of the four discrete navigation commands: move forward, turn right, turn left, or stop. The objective of this training stage is to learn the func-tion yi = h(zi), which maps a given latent representation 

zi to a probability distribution over the possible actions, 

yi = ( yf orward , y right , y lef t , y stop )i. To this end, we mini-mize the categorical cross-entropy loss function (Dufourq and Bassett, 2017), defined as: 

LH = −

> M

X

> i=1

(lf orward , l right , l lef t , l stop )i ln h(zi), (4) 

h(zi) = ( yf orward , y right , y lef t , y stop )i.

This loss function quantifies the dissimilarity between the predicted action probabilities and the ground-truth labels, guiding the network to learn an accurate mapping from perception to action. The efficiency of this stage is greatly enhanced by the VAE’s dimensionality reduction, which enables the use of an exceptionally compact MLP. This design is not only crucial for rapid training but also a prerequisite for the computationally intensive evolutionary optimization phase that follows. 

4.2. Collective Navigation Policies 

This subsection details our hybrid method for automat-ically designing collective behaviors. We frame the chal-lenge of learning a collective policy, πcollective , as a deep reinforcement learning problem. However, instead of em-ploying traditional gradient-based DRL algorithms, which can be sensitive to hyperparameter tuning (Nguyen et al., 2021) and struggle with exploration in sparse-reward set-tings, we utilize evolution strategies. To realize these decentralized behaviors, the choice of the optimization algorithm is critical. While gradient-based deep reinforcement learning algorithms, such as PPO or TRPO, are prevalent in continuous control, they present significant practical limitations in swarm robotics. Specifically, gradient-based MARL methods struggle with the temporal credit assignment problem when dealing with sparse rewards in reinforcement learning ( e.g. , delayed bi-nary penalties upon collision in complex environments). Recent literature has demonstrated highly effective so-lutions to this reward sparsity challenge; for example, em-ploying transfer-learning-based meta-Q-learning to con-struct implicit advantage functions has proven remarkably robust for path planning under dynamic uncertainties (Liu et al., 2026). While such sophisticated value-based frame-works excel in environments where rich state information can be leveraged, our architecture operates under extreme partial observability by compressing visual inputs into a 32-variable latent vector. In this strictly constrained con-text, gradient-based methods become highly susceptible to vanishing gradients and instability (Nguyen et al., 2021). In contrast, evolution strategies provide a robust alter-native. Beyond their general parallelizability, ES methods offer distinct advantages for reinforcement learning: they are inherently invariant to delayed reward distributions, do not rely on backpropagation through time, and bypass the need for value function approximations (Salimans et al., 2017), making them exceptionally stable in non-stationary multi-agent settings. However, this approach introduces a critical practical trade-off: ES algorithms are notori-ously sample-inefficient when tasked with optimizing high-dimensional neural network architectures (Nguyen et al., 2021) directly from raw pixels. To mitigate this architectural trade-off, our method-ology draws inspiration from the generative representa-tion techniques proposed by Ha and Schmidhuber (2018). By integrating a pre-trained variational autoencoder into the macroscopic model, high-dimensional visual inputs are effectively compressed into a 32-dimensional latent bot-tleneck. Consequently, our individual navigation policy, 

πindividual , can be parameterized by an ultra-compact multi-layer perceptron. Within this drastically reduced parameter space, the traditional sample inefficiency of ES algorithms is bypassed. Neuro-evolutionary techniques such as CEM and CMA-ES thus become remarkably ef-ficient at escaping local optima and discovering robust de-centralized policies, outperforming gradient-based alterna-tives. 10 Our neuro-evolutionary approach uses fitness values cal-culated from individual evaluations in each training itera-tion k. We employ the MARL reward function from Eq. (1) to calculate the fitness values, introducing spatial and temporal knowledge of the environment into the objective function. Thus, we mitigate the problems of deception and bootstrapping (Kuckling, 2023). These fitness values guide the optimization process of the individual reactive navigation behavior, previously learned by means of the compressed image classifier H. Its design offers two ad-ditional advantages: reduced evolutionary process search space dimensions and focused optimization on model pa-rameters, specifically their weights. These advantages help mitigate the high dimensionality problem (Brambilla et al., 2013) and reduce training computational costs. To clarify the explicit interaction between the perception and control modules during the evolutionary RL phase, it is vital to note that the parameters of our variational autoencoder are strictly frozen. The VAE operates as an inference-only feature extractor that continuously provides the state representation to the mobile agents. The rein-forcement learning signal ( i.e. , the fitness score) derived from environment interactions is exclusively used to mu-tate and optimize the synaptic weights of the MLP con-troller. This explicit decoupling ensures that the stable, pre-learned visual representations are not catastrophically forgotten or disrupted by the high variance of the evolu-tionary exploration. Within our hybrid framework, it is necessary to con-ceptually separate fitness evaluation from policy optimiza-tion. In our pipeline, the reinforcement learning paradigm is confined to the fitness evaluation phase: agents inter-act with the environment over episodes, accumulating re-wards. Once an episode concludes, the RL loop yields a scalar fitness score. Conversely, policy optimization is entirely governed by the evolution strategies. The ES al-gorithms do not perform backpropagation or use temporal gradients derived from the RL interactions; instead, they treat the RL fitness scores as a black-box evaluation met-ric to rank, select, and mutate the underlying synaptic weights of the macroscopic model. The transition from individual policy learning to collec-tive policy evolution represents a critical juncture in our training pipeline. The success of the final emergent col-lective behavior is heavily dependent on the quality of the pre-trained individual policy, πindividual . Because learn-ing robust obstacle avoidance from scratch in a multi-agent environment typically suffers from sparse reward signals and severe penalties for critical failures, starting the evolutionary process from randomly initialized neural network weights would consistently result in poor initial performance. This would yield a predominantly flat fit-ness landscape where the ES algorithms struggle to find a meaningful direction for improvement. Therefore, the in-dividual policy provides the essential foundational compe-tence ( i.e. , valuable prior knowledge about reactive static obstacle avoidance), acting as a mandatory stepping stone. The operational principle of this transition relies on di-rect weight transfer to seed the evolutionary search dis-tributions. The pre-trained weights of the individual MLP classifier H, learned via supervised learning in the first stage, are extracted and flattened into a single one-dimensional vector. This vector acts as the foundational blueprint for the multi-agent evolutionary loop by defin-ing the central point of the initial probability distributions. By injecting a predefined initial variance or step size, the ES algorithms generate a starting population of candidate policies distributed precisely around this competent base-line. The subsequent evolutionary process refines these base-line weights to account for dynamic obstacles ( i.e. , the other swarm agents), thus bridging the gap between iso-lated navigation and coordinated multi-agent exploration. For this purpose, we also fine-tune the variational autoen-coder G to improve perception and avoidance of dynamic obstacles. This involves large-scale image capture in our simulated environment using multiple mobile robots simul-taneously. The acquired observations create an extensive training dataset for unsupervised autoencoder adjustment using the loss function from Eq. (2). Our training protocol incorporates two key enhance-ments: • Parameter Sharing : All agents in the swarm share a single policy’s parameters during a fitness evaluation (i.e. , a MARL episode). This protocol efficiently opti-mizes collaborative learning in homogeneous robotic swarms while addressing the non-stationarity of the multi-agent environment (Gupta et al., 2017). • Curriculum Learning : We incrementally increase the maximum MARL episode duration, Tk, at each generation k, starting from an initial duration T0 and up to a maximum number of generations κ:

Tk = T0 + k ∗ integer (4500 /κ ). (5) This strategy accelerates the initial training itera-tions to encourage broad exploration of the solution space and prevents premature convergence. As the evolutionary process advances and candidate solu-tions improve, longer episodes allow for more effective exploitation of the most promising navigation con-trollers. 

4.2.1. Cross-Entropy Method 

Our first evolution strategy is a specialized implemen-tation of the cross-entropy method, a type of Estimation of Distribution Algorithm (EDA). The core principle of this family of algorithms involves iteratively managing and updating a search distribution to sample potential solu-tions, which are then evaluated (Wierstra et al., 2014). At each iteration k, the CEM algorithm samples a population of candidate controllers, Wk, from a multivariate Gaus-sian distribution N (μk, V k). In our neuro-evolutionary 11 approach, each candidate solution, wkp , represents a com-plete set of weights for the MLP controller and is sampled around the mean vector μk, which represents the mean solution of population Wk. The distribution is parameter-ized by both the mean vector and a diagonal covariance matrix Vk (Nguyen et al., 2021), computed using a vari-ance vector σk.

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code implementation of the pro-posed CEM algorithm. 

Require:  

> 1:

Initial variance σ0, population size ρ, maximum num-ber of generations κ, individual navigation policy 

πindividual , elite-set size ϵ, number of generations γ

with extra variance. 

Ensure:  

> 2:

Collective navigation policy πcollective . 

> 3: 4:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 5:

Initialize an individual of W0 with w0 

> p

= πindividual . 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

k = 1 . 

> 8:

Initialize mean vector μk as the mean of W0. 

> 9:

Initialize variance vector σk as the standard deviation of W0. 

> 10:

while k < = κ do  

> 11:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 12:

Create a new individual for Wk with Eq. (6).  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 15:

Get the fitness value of an individual of Wk with Eq. (1).  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Select ϵ individuals with the highest fitness from 

Wk. 

> 18:

Update μk+1 according to the mean of the ϵ se-lected individuals.  

> 19:

Update σk+1 according to the standard deviation of the ϵ selected individuals.  

> 20:

Compute extra variance with σextra k+1 = max(1 −(k+1/γ ), 0) ∗ σ20 . 

> 21:

Update covariance matrix with Vk+1 =

diagonal (σ2 

> k+1

+ σextra k+1 ). 

> 22:

k = k + 1 . 

> 23:

end while 

As previously discussed, our EC approach begins with an initial solution, represented by population W0. In the first iteration of our CEM algorithm, we initialize the mean vector μk and variance vector σk as the mean and stan-dard deviation of this initial population. In subsequent iterations, we update these vectors using an elite set com-prising a fixed number ϵ of individuals. These elite individ-uals represent the candidate solutions from population Wk

that achieve the highest accumulated reward values during a multi-agent reinforcement learning episode. This elitist approach promotes the exploitation of promising solutions 1 Initialization    

> ●Create an initial population of pre-trained controllers
> ●Initialize mean vector as the mean of the initial population
> ●Initialize variance vector as the variance of the initial population

Training Hyperparameters      

> ●Initial variance
> ●Population size
> ●Maximum number of generations
> ●Elite-set size
> ●Number of generations with extra variance

INPUT  

> ●Pre-trained individual navigation policy

2 Generation    

> ●Inject extra variance into the diagonal covariance matrix
> ●Calculate the sampling distribution with the covariance matrix
> ●Sample controllers from the computed distribution

3 Evaluation   

> ●Get fitness values of controllers using a MARL reward function
> ●Increase the maximum MARL episode duration

4 Selection  

> ●Select an elite set of top performing controllers

5 Update    

> ●Update mean vector from the elite set
> ●Update variance vector from the elite set
> ●Compute extra variance for the next generation

Iteration 

No 

Last Generation? 

Yes 

OUTPUT  

> ●Best collective navigation policy
> Figure 3: Flowchart of the proposed CEM algorithm.

based on their fitness values. The selection of elitist individuals is a technique em-ployed by numerous researchers using the cross-entropy method, including Botev and Kroese (2004) and Nguyen 12 et al. (2021). Their approach introduces an additional enhancement to the basic CEM implementation by inject-ing supplementary variance into the sampling distribution during a predetermined number of iterations. At each gen-eration k, we calculate the extra variance magnitude σextra k

using two hyperparameters: the number γ of iterations for variance injection and a specified initial variance σ0. This additional variance is incorporated into the diagonal co-variance matrix Vk used to generate each individual in the population Wk of candidate solutions. The generation of a new individual wkp follows the following formulation: 

wkp = N (μk, V k), (6) 

Vk = diagonal (σ2 

> k

+ σextra k ),σextra k = max(1 − (k/γ ), 0) ∗ σ20 .

The hyperparameter γ plays a crucial role, as injecting extra variance over more generations enables more thor-ough exploration of potential solutions. This mechanism functions as a form of mutation (Bäck and Schwefel, 1996), allowing the training algorithm to produce more diverse in-dividuals, particularly during the initial iterations of the evolutionary process. The complete workflow of our CEM implementation is illustrated in Fig. 3 and detailed in Al-gorithm 1. 

4.2.2. Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy 

Our second ES algorithm is the covariance matrix adap-tation evolution strategy, a powerful black-box optimiza-tion algorithm renowned for its performance in optimiz-ing synaptic weights of neural networks with limited pa-rameters. CMA-ES employs a sophisticated mechanism for adapting the search distribution. Its key advantage lies in its ability to dynamically adapt the covariance ma-trix of the search distribution (Hansen and Ostermeier, 2001), which enables efficient exploration in highly corre-lated search spaces. This characteristic offers significant advantages when optimizing synaptic weights for neural robotic controllers (Yu et al., 2015). While CMA-ES shares operational principles with the cross-entropy method, the generation of individuals at each iteration k differs significantly. For CMA-ES, each candidate solution wkp is produced by combining the cur-rent generation’s mean μk with a multivariate Gaussian distribution N (0 , σ 2

> k

Vk) centered at 0. This distribution incorporates the variance vector σk and current covari-ance matrix Vk. Thus, we can express the generation of new potential solutions as: 

wkp = μk + N (0 , σ 2

> k

Vk). (7) Our CMA-ES implementation initializes population 

W0 using the individual navigation controller πindividual 

weights. To jump-start the exploration around this pre-trained baseline, a global initial step size ( i.e. , the variance 

σ0) is defined as a hyperparameter, and the covariance matrix Vk is initialized as the identity matrix, I. Unlike 1 Initialization     

> ●Create an initial population of pre-trained controllers
> ●Initialize mean vector as the mean of the initial population
> ●Initialize variance vector with the initial variance value
> ●Initialize covariance matrix as the identity matrix

Training Hyperparameters     

> ●Initial variance
> ●Population size
> ●Maximum number of generations
> ●Weight decay factor

INPUT  

> ●Pre-trained individual navigation policy

2 Generation   

> ●Calculate the sampling distribution with the covariance matrix
> ●Sample controllers from the computed distribution

3 Evaluation    

> ●Get fitness values of controllers using a MARL reward function
> ●Adjust fitness values by applying L2 regularization
> ●Increase the maximum MARL episode duration

4 Selection  

> ●Select top performing controllers

Iteration 

No 

Last Generation? 

Yes 

OUTPUT  

> ●Best collective navigation policy

5 Update    

> ●Update mean vector from the selected controllers
> ●Update variance vector from the selected controllers
> ●Update covariance matrix for the next generation
> Figure 4: Flowchart of the proposed CMA-ES algorithm.

our CEM implementation, this evolution strategy does not maintain a fixed number of high-performing individuals. Instead, it selects solutions achieving higher accumulated rewards, which can undergo recombination and mutation 13 Algorithm 2 Pseudo-code implementation of the pro-posed CMA-ES algorithm. 

Require:  

> 1:

Initial variance σ0, population size ρ, maximum num-ber of generations κ, individual navigation policy 

πindividual , weight decay factor λ.

Ensure:  

> 2:

Collective navigation policy πcollective . 

> 3: 4:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 5:

Initialize an individual of W0 with w0 

> p

= πindividual . 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

k = 1 . 

> 8:

Initialize mean vector μk as the mean of W0. 

> 9:

Initialize variance vector σk with σ0. 

> 10:

Initialize covariance matrix with Vk = I. 

> 11:

while k < = κ do  

> 12:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 13:

Create a new individual for Wk with Eq. (7).  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 16:

Get the fitness value of an individual of Wk with Eq. (1).  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

for p = 1 ,..., ρ do  

> 19:

Adjust the fitness value of an individual of Wk

with λ and Eq. (8).  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

Select individuals with the highest fitness from Wk. 

> 22:

Update μk+1 according to the mean of the selected individuals.  

> 23:

Update σk+1 according to the standard deviation of the selected individuals.  

> 24:

Update covariance matrix Vk+1 for the next gener-ation.  

> 25:

k = k + 1 . 

> 26:

end while 

(Hansen and Ostermeier, 2001). These selected individuals inform the updates of the mean vector μk+1 , variance vec-tor σk+1 , and covariance matrix Vk+1 for the subsequent generation. Inspired by related work in neuro-evolution (Ha, 2017), we incorporate an L2 regularization technique into the fit-ness function ( i.e. , the proposed multi-agent reinforcement learning reward function). This method penalizes large network weights and promotes simpler, more generaliz-able solutions (Moradi et al., 2019). The adjusted fitness 

R′(Wk) for a population is calculated as: 

R′(Wk) = R(Wk) − λ 1

ρ

> ρ

X

> p=1

(wkp ∗ wkp ), (8) where λ is the weight decay factor and ρ is the popula-tion size. As noted by Moradi et al. (2019), this regular-ization helps prevent overfitting to the training scenarios and enhances the robustness of the final evolved policy. Thereby, our approach aligns with recent research trends highlighted by scholars such as Hasselmann et al. (2021). They suggest that incorporating deep learning regulariza-tion techniques represents the most promising direction for automatically designing swarm robotic controllers through neuro-evolution. The complete workflow of our CMA-ES implementation is depicted in Fig. 4 and detailed in Algo-rithm 2. 

5. Collective Policy Comparison 

This section provides a rigorous empirical evaluation of the proposed hybrid AI-driven methodology. We conduct a multi-stage analysis centered on collective visual explo-ration within a simulated, dynamic environment using a low-cost robotic swarm. The mobile agents are tasked with executing collision-free navigation using only monocular camera RGB images as their sensory input, and critically, without any form of inter-agent communication, thereby ensuring system simplicity and robustness. The virtual vi-sion device mounted on each robot was modeled after the specifications of the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 2 2.To establish a robust benchmark, the performance of our most promising evolved neural controllers is quan-titatively and qualitatively compared against a conven-tional Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)-based nav-igation approach (Kolar et al., 2020). This reactive con-trol method draws inspiration from classical bio-inspired navigation paradigms. Specifically, it is based on Brait-enberg vehicles and the concept of negative tropotaxis, where agents exhibit an aversion response to certain stim-uli (Shaikh and Rañó, 2020). In our work, each robot’s LiDAR readings of nearby obstacles serve as the aversive stimulus, generating appropriate motor responses that di-rect the mobile agents away from detected obstacles. LiDAR technology is widely adopted in mobile robotics due to its high precision in distance measurement. In this baseline scenario, each virtual agent was equipped with a simulated distance sensor equivalent to the Slamtec RPLIDAR A1 laser scanner 3. Comparing our learned vision-based controllers against this traditional, sensor-heavy method allows us to assess their relative perfor-mance, comprehensively highlighting the potential advan-tages in efficiency, cost reduction, and adaptability of the proposed monocular approach. While evaluating our proposed hybrid methodology, we intentionally selected this traditional LiDAR-based reactive approach as our primary baseline rather than gradient-based deep reinforcement learning algorithms, such as PPO or TRPO, or alternative neuro-evolutionary approaches. Although PPO and TRPO represent the state 

> 2https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/camera-module-v2/
> 3https://www.slamtec.com/en/lidar/a1

14 of the art in continuous control, conducting a direct com-parison with these methodologies within our specific eval-uation framework would present a fundamental paradigm mismatch. Representative DL-based MARL architectures often as-sume the existence of explicit multi-agent collaboration mechanisms ( e.g. , local communication networks to share state information), or demand precise spatial data ( e.g. ,global coordinates) to mitigate the challenges of sparse rewards. In contrast, our approach fundamentally cham-pions a fully communication-free, decentralized paradigm to maximize system simplicity and scalability on severely resource-constrained hardware. Forcing such gradient-based algorithms to operate un-der the strict constraints of our swarm architecture ( i.e. ,purely decentralized execution, zero inter-agent communi-cation, and raw monocular vision compressed into a 32-variable latent vector) would severely degrade their con-vergence capabilities, leading to an unfair and uninfor-mative comparison. Therefore, the conventional LiDAR-based navigation paradigm provides a far more rigorous and pragmatic proof of the proposed system’s viability for real-world swarm applications than artificial comparisons with heavily constrained DRL algorithms. The experiments were conducted using our proprietary high-fidelity physics simulator. This simulator provides a controlled yet realistic testing ground, facilitating the ac-curate modeling of diverse indoor environments and com-mercial robot platforms. It utilizes the Planck.js 4 2D physics engine, which is built upon the widely recognized Box2D 5 engine, and is seamlessly integrated with our deep learning, reinforcement learning, and evolutionary compu-tation frameworks. This evaluation process is structured as follows: first, in Subsection 5.1, a sensitivity analysis of evolutionary hy-perparameters is conducted to justify the selection of the primary collective policies. Subsequently, in Subsections 5.2 and 5.3, the chosen policies are benchmarked against the LiDAR baseline using a comprehensive suite of energy and navigation metrics. 

5.1. Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

The automatic synthesis of decentralized swarm con-trollers through neuro-evolutionary strategies is highly contingent upon the precise calibration of the search space parameters. While an exhaustive grid search is the stan-dard approach for hyperparameter tuning in many deep learning contexts, executing a full-factorial grid search over all possible hyperparameter combinations is computation-ally prohibitive in our specific framework. This limitation arises from the online nature of our MARL process, where each fitness evaluation requires a full multi-agent physics simulation within a non-stationary environment subject to 

> 4https://piqnt.com/planck.js/
> 5https://box2d.org/

continuous lighting variations. Consequently, our sensitiv-ity analysis is structured as a focused, partial search, de-liberately fixing certain parameters to preserve pre-trained knowledge while varying the hyperparameters directly re-sponsible for managing the exploration-exploitation trade-off. The evolutionary algorithms begin with an initial pop-ulation seeded by a pre-trained individual map-less navi-gation policy ( i.e. , πindividual ). This policy possesses valu-able reactive static obstacle avoidance capabilities, learned via supervised learning from a synthetic dataset, as ex-plained in Subsection 4.1. To transition from individual static avoidance to collective dynamic avoidance, we fine-tuned the underlying variational autoencoder using un-supervised learning, enabling the extraction of visual fea-tures associated with dynamic obstacles ( i.e. , other mobile agents). Crucially, to prevent the catastrophic forgetting of these pre-trained visual features and foundational navigation skills, we constrained the initial evolutionary search space. Specifically, we intentionally fixed the population size to a relatively small number of 32 candidate controllers per generation. We also bounded the initial variance hyperpa-rameters to low values: 1.5 for the cross-entropy method and 1.0 for the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy. Allowing massive populations or high initial vari-ances would induce an overly diffusive search, destroying the established collision-free navigation parameters before beneficial emergent collective behaviors could consolidate. Furthermore, a curriculum learning strategy was imple-mented not merely as an optional enhancement, but as a critical acceleration heuristic to balance exploration and exploitation. The maximum episode duration, Tk, progres-sively increases over the training iterations according to Eq. (5). Starting from a moderate initial value of T0 = 500 

simulation steps, the duration was gradually extended to a maximum of 4500 time steps by the final iteration. Given that each simulation step equals 1/3 of a second, episode durations scale from approximately 2.5 minutes in the first generation to 25 minutes in the last. Because any collision strictly and immediately terminates an episode during the training phase, starting optimization directly with 4500-step episodes would severely penalize early exploratory actions, drastically slowing down convergence and increas-ing the likelihood of premature overfitting to sub-optimal, overly conservative stop-and-wait behaviors. The evolutionary process itself was bounded to a maxi-mum of 2000 generations. This termination threshold was not arbitrarily selected; preliminary empirical tests indi-cated that the learning curves for both the CEM and CMA-ES algorithms consistently reached a convergence plateau near this generation mark. Extending the online multi-agent simulations beyond 2000 generations yielded only marginal performance gains that simply did not jus-tify the exponentially compounding computational costs. Building upon these mathematically and computation-ally justified constraints, we systematically evaluated three 15 distinct configurations for the remaining key hyperparam-eters of both the CEM and CMA-ES algorithms. The results of this evaluation process allows us to justify the selection of the final policies based on convergence stability and spatial coverage effectiveness. 

5.1.1. Experimental Setup 

The training and evaluation of the swarm controllers were conducted in a simulated indoor corridor environ-ment. To provide a granular assessment of collective be-havior, the environment was explicitly partitioned into 22 rectangular sectors, as illustrated in Fig. 5. To quantify the efficacy of the evolved policies, two pri-mary metrics were employed: • Accumulated Reward : The total number of reward points garnered by the system during a multi-agent reinforcement learning episode, calculated using Eq. (1). This serves as a global measure of task effective-ness, actively incentivizing exploration while heavily penalizing collisions. • Explored Sectors : The absolute count of distinct navigable regions in the environment visited at least once by any robot. This metric circumvents the ab-straction of reward points to provide a direct, tangible measure of spatial coverage. 

5.1.2. Cross-Entropy Method Analysis 

Our CEM implementation depends heavily on the elite-set size, ϵ, and the duration of the supplementary variance injection, γ. The elite set fosters exploitation by propagat-ing the most promising candidate solutions, while the extra variance injection acts as a targeted mutation mechanism to prevent premature convergence in the high-dimensional weight space. We evaluated three distinct configurations to isolate the impact of these factors: elitism rates of 20%, 30%, and 40%, corresponding to elite sets of 6, 9, and 12 individuals from the population of 32, combined with extra variance injections spanning the first 100, 500, and 1000 generations, respectively. Table 2 formally details these experiments. The training progression curves depicted in Fig. 6 ex-plicitly reveal the impact of these hyperparameter trade-offs. Configuration (1) converges rapidly to a local opti-mum, achieving a mean reward of 396.03 points as early as generation 67, due to an insufficient variance injection pe-riod that stifles exploration. Conversely, Configuration (3) displays an overly diffusive search behavior, postponing its highest mean reward, 627.58 points, until generation 1255, hindering the early consolidation of high-performing poli-cies. Configuration (2), with a 30% elitism rate and 500 gen-erations of extra variance, exhibits the most favorable and stable learning trajectory. This is rigorously confirmed by our post-training validation phase, spanning 100 indepen-dent trials summarized in Table 3. In these validation tests, Configuration (2) achieves a superior mean spatial coverage of 20.38 sectors and an average reward of 4673.10 points, significantly outperforming Configuration (1), and specially, Configuration (3). This latter milestone proves that excessively high values for elitism and variance injec-tion do not necessarily yield superior performance. Beyond achieving the highest mean spatial coverage, Configuration (2) also demonstrates superior policy sta-bility. By extracting the distribution of visited sectors from Fig. 7, we calculate a standard deviation of 3.05 for Configuration (2), compared to 4.03 and 4.88 for Config-urations (1) and (3), respectively. This lower dispersion quantitatively confirms that the selected hyperparameter balance not only maximizes exploration but also ensures highly consistent collective behavior across independent evaluations. Reflecting on these results, the superiority of Configu-ration (2), hereafter denoted as πCEM collective , stems from its ability to maintain swarm coherence while visiting all 22 sectors of the environment in 55% of trials, as shown in Fig. 7. This configuration effectively balances the risk of colli-sion with the imperative of forward exploration, satisfying the robustness requirements for autonomous navigation. 

5.1.3. Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy Analysis 

For the CMA-ES algorithm, our sensitivity study fo-cused on the weight decay factor, λ, used for L2 regular-ization. This parameter is crucial in deep neuro-evolution; it actively penalizes large network weights to prevent over-fitting to the specific training scenarios and mitigates the vanishing gradient problem (Pierson and Gashler, 2017), thereby directly enhancing the generalization robustness of the final evolved policy. Three decay factors were sys-tematically tested: 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, representing low, moderate, and high regularization constraints. Table 4 presents the precise configurations evaluated. As depicted in the respective training curves, the CMA-ES algorithm exhibits a characteristically smoother fit-ness growth compared to the cross-entropy method, at-tributable to its second-order optimization nature and dy-namic covariance matrix adaptation. Configuration (5), utilizing a moderate weight decay factor of 0.05, achieves the most robust performance, reaching a peak mean re-ward of 725.58 points at generation 1508. As observed in Fig. 8, a lower decay factor ( i.e. , Configuration (4)) results in more erratic fitness growth and suboptimal rewards, whereas excessive regularization ( i.e. , Configuration (6)) overly restricts the neural controller’s expressive capacity, capping the mean reward at 674.95 points by generation 1080. The validation phase unequivocally justifies the selec-tion of Configuration (5), hereafter denoted as πCM A −ES collective .As shown in Table 5, it demonstrates the most balanced performance, achieving 19.44 mean sectors explored and a robust average reward of 4587.92 points across 100 tri-als, signifying a policy that is both spatially effective and 16 012345678910 11 

2143658710 912 11 14 13 16 15 18 17 20 19 22 21 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 XYFigure 5: Division of the simulated environment into 22 rectangular sectors. This map shows the partitioned indoor corridor (in green) used for quantitative evaluation of spatial coverage. The corridor has a navigable surface approximately 20 meters long and 2 meters wide. Table 2: Hyperparameter configurations for the CEM algorithm sensitivity analysis. 

Hyperparameter Description Configuration (1) (2) (3) 

J Agents in the system 4 4 4

T Time steps per episode 500-4500 500-4500 500-4500 

C Collision termination threshold 0 0 0

κ Total generations 2000 2000 2000 

ρ Population size 32 32 32 

σ0 Initial variance 1.5 1.5 1.5 

ϵ Elite-set size 6 9 12 

γ Generations with extra variance 100 500 1000  

> Table 3: Quantitative performance comparison of CEM configura-tions across 100 validation trials.

Configuration Sectors Reward 

(1) 16.93 3573.56 (2) 20.38 4673.10 

(3) 14.55 2483.32 highly safe. As reflected in Fig. 9, Configuration (5) exhibits a more robust navigation profile characterized by highly consis-tent performance. This is statistically supported by the standard deviation of the visited sectors across the 100 validation trials, which is 1.94 for Configuration (5), com-pared to 3.15 and 2.60 for Configurations (4) and (6), re-spectively. This dispersion metric explicitly validates that the selected moderate weight decay factor effectively min-imizes performance variance, confirming its optimal suit-ability as the final πCM A −ES collective policy. 

5.1.4. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Parameters 

Regarding the multi-agent reinforcement learning me-chanics, each fitness evaluation dictates the simulation of a swarm comprising four differential-drive ground robots operating within our synthetic corridor environment. To pragmatically address the high computational demands in-herent to online MARL processes, the fitness value ( i.e. ,the accumulated reward) of any given candidate controller was computed through a single episode of interaction with the environment. We must acknowledge that calculating 17 Figure 6: Evolution of the mean accumulated reward during 2000 generations of CEM training. The curves represent the filtered improvement progress for hyperparameter configurations (1) (in blue), (2) (in orange), and (3) (in green). Table 4: Hyperparameter configurations for the CMA-ES algorithm sensitivity analysis. 

Hyperparameter Description Configuration (4) (5) (6) 

J Agents in the system 4 4 4

T Time steps per episode 500-4500 500-4500 500-4500 

C Collision termination threshold 0 0 0

κ Total generations 2000 2000 2000 

ρ Population size 32 32 32 

σ0 Initial variance 1.0 1.0 1.0 

λ Weight decay factor 0.01 0.05 0.1 

> Table 5: Quantitative performance comparison of CMA-ES configu-rations across 100 validation trials.

Configuration Sectors Reward 

(4) 17.75 1195.83 (5) 19.44 4587.92 

(6) 16.86 890.18 fitness across multiple independent episodes for each can-didate would theoretically yield a more stable estimation and reduce generational variance. However, adopting such an approach would render our online training phase com-putationally prohibitive. This single-episode evaluation methodology inherently introduces a degree of training instability and high vari-ance across generations, which justifies the presentation of filtered or smoothed progression curves in our train-ing performance analysis to clearly illustrate the under-18 a) CEM (Elitism Rate: 20%, Extra Variance: 100 Generations) b) CEM (Elitism Rate: 30%, Extra Variance: 500 Generations) c) CEM (Elitism Rate: 40%, Extra Variance: 1000 Generations) Figure 7: Number of tests achieving specific numbers of visited sectors. The diagrams compare the ability of our three CEM hyperparameter configurations to explore the indoor corridor across 100 validation trials. 

lying improvement trends without the noise of episodic stochasticity. As observed in Fig. 6 and Fig. 8, we employ a simplified representation that only updates the reward curve when a configuration achieves a strictly superior mean fitness compared to its previous best. This “best-so-far” approach filters the inherent stochastic noise of multi-agent interactions and highlights the authentic optimiza-tion milestones. A critical element of our training framework is the im-plementation of a highly strict termination condition based on collisions. During the training phase, an episode is im-mediately terminated if any single member of the robotic swarm collides with either a static obstacle or a dynamic one ( i.e. , another mobile agent). This severe constraint is intentionally designed to force the evolutionary algorithms to prioritize truly effective, collision-free emergent behav-iors from the very first generation. This strict penalization synergizes directly with the 19 Figure 8: Evolution of the mean accumulated reward during 2000 generations of CMA-ES training. The curves represent the filtered improvement progress for hyperparameter configurations (4) (in blue), (5) (in orange), and (6) (in green). 

aforementioned curriculum learning strategy. If early gen-erations were evaluated over excessively long episodes, the probability of encountering a collision-inducing edge case would approach absolute certainty, thereby flattening the fitness landscape and stalling the exploration of the solu-tion space. Conversely, initiating the training with shorter episodes ( e.g. , 500 steps) establishes an achievable survival milestone. It increases the probability that early, unrefined candidate policies can successfully complete a full episode without triggering the severe collision penalty, providing a clear and stable selection signal for the evolutionary al-gorithm before progressively increasing the temporal com-plexity of the navigation task. Furthermore, to thoroughly evaluate the generalization capabilities of the evolved controllers and actively prevent overfitting to the specific training environment, we estab-lished a rigorous methodological dichotomy between the training and evaluation conditions. During training, the ambient illumination of the environment undergoes contin-uous variations to build basic perceptual robustness in the visual feature extraction. Concurrently, while the initial position and orientation of each robot within the swarm are randomized, the swarm as a whole is constrained to adopt a single initial formation centralized within the in-ner corridor. This controlled initialization was deliberately selected to guarantee a faster, more stable convergence to-wards satisfactory collective navigation policies, prevent-ing excessive early-stage complexity from completely dis-rupting the emergence of cooperative behaviors. In stark contrast, the evaluation phase was designed to rigorously test the boundaries and robustness of the learned policies under unforeseen conditions. During the validation trials, the swarm is randomly assigned one of six distinct initial formations. This deliberate divergence from the training conditions ensures that the macroscopic performance is not merely a product of memorizing a spe-cific starting configuration. Additionally, during evalua-tion, the lighting conditions are held constant throughout the entirety of each episode, with the specific lighting level randomly determined at the onset. This methodological choice allows the simulation to emulate specific environ-mental conditions, such as varying levels of ambient day-20 a) CMA-ES (Weight Decay Factor: 0.01) b) CMA-ES (Weight Decay Factor: 0.05) 

> c) CMA-ES (Weight Decay Factor: 0.10) Figure 9: Number of tests achieving specific numbers of visited sectors. The diagrams compare the ability of our three CMA-ES hyperparameter configurations to explore the indoor corridor across 100 validation trials.

light at different specific hours, thereby verifying the true adaptability of the vision-based policies to prolonged en-vironmental shifts. The duration of our evaluation trials is deliberately set to 5000 simulation steps, which exceeds the maximum cur-riculum training horizon of 4500 steps. This temporal ex-tension serves as a rigorous stress test to verify the stability and generalization capabilities of the learned policies. By pushing the swarm beyond the temporal bounds encoun-tered during the evolutionary phase, we ensure that the agents can reliably sustain decentralized, collision-free op-eration over prolonged periods without suffering from un-foreseen behavioral degradation. Finally, unlike the train-ing phase, agents are permitted to recover and continue exploring after a collision during evaluation, albeit with the severe reward penalty specified in Eq. (1). 21 5.2. Experimental Validation and Behavioral Analysis 

In this subsection, we present and discuss the quan-titative and qualitative results derived from the valida-tion phase of the two most promising visual exploration policies, πCEM collective and πCM A −ES collective , in comparison with the LiDAR-based benchmark. Furthermore, to directly ad-dress the sensitivity of these policies to environmental con-straints, this subsection culminates in a dedicated ablation study isolating the impact of collision termination rules on the emergent exploratory behaviors. 

5.2.1. Validation Metrics 

To holistically measure the performance, behavioral sta-bility, and energy efficiency of the collective policies across 100 independent validation trials, we monitored the mean cumulative reward and the number of explored sectors, both initially introduced in Subection 5.1 for the hyper-parameter sensitivity study. In addition to these pri-mary task-oriented indicators, we incorporated the follow-ing three core validation metrics: • Inter-Robot Collisions Percentage : The percent-age of total episode time during which one or more swarm members experienced a collision with another individual agent. We focused on collisions with dy-namic obstacles ( i.e. , other robots) as the training goal was to evolve policies to avoid moving objects. • Traveled Distance : The cumulative sum of individ-ual displacements, quantified in meters (m), executed by all mobile agents in the system. Considering a swarm composed of J robots, the total distance δtotal 

traveled during T time instants is formally expressed by the equation: 

δtotal =

> J

X

> j=1
> T

X

> t=1

δjt , (9) 

δjt =

q

(χjt+1 − χjt )2 + ( ψjt+1 − ψjt )2.

In Eq. (9), δjt refers to the Euclidean distance between two points, represented by the (χ, ψ ) coordinates of two environment positions traversed by the individual agent ej in consecutive simulation steps, t and t + 1 .• Energy Consumption : The total energy consumed by the entire swarm per episode, quantified in watt-seconds (Ws), providing a critical quantitative met-ric for future hardware deployment efficiency. This is calculated by summing the instantaneous motor and sensor energy consumption (Hausler et al., 2016), 

ζjmotors,t and ζjsensor,t , for all agents ej , as shown in Eq. (10). 

ζtotal =

> J

X

> j=1
> T

X

> t=1

ζjt , (10) 

ζjt = ζjmotors,t + ζjsensor,t .

We estimated the instantaneous energy consumption corresponding to each robot’s motors, ζjmotors,t , by implementing the following quadratic model: 

ζjmotors,t = (2 ∗ Pbase + K1 ∗ νjt + K2 ∗ νjt

> 2

) ∗ ∆t, 

(11) 

νjt = δjt

∆t .

The quadratic model from Eq. (11) accounts for the base power Pbase in steady state of each of the two motors of our differential-drive ground vehicles, the velocity νjt in meters per second (m/s) at which each individual agent moves in each simulation step ∆t,and two empirical coefficients, K1 and K2, obtained through experimental characterization related to the motors. The motor model used was the 180 Optical Encoder, typically integrated into low-cost Makeblock mBot Ranger platforms. Based on its technical spec-ifications 6, we determined that Pbase = 0 .5 W. We calculated the instantaneous energy consumption associated with the sensor embedded in each robot by multiplying the nominal power Psensor of the in-put device by the value assigned to ∆t (i.e. , 1/3 of a second), which is formally expressed as: 

ζjsensor,t = Psensor ∗ ∆t. (12) For the conventional LiDAR-based approach, after consulting the datasheet 7 of the Slamtec RPLIDAR A1 laser scanner, we established that Psensor = 2 W. In the case of the monocular RGB camera used by the proposed method, this value was significantly lower, specifically Psensor = 0 .3 W. To determine this sec-ond nominal power value, we started from the techni-cal specifications 8 of the Sony IMX219 CMOS image sensor used by the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 2. It is critical to clarify that the sensors are modeled in a continuous active state to ensure gapless reactive collision avoidance. Furthermore, this macroscopic metric strictly isolates the mechanical and sensory energy footprint; the computational overhead of the VAE inference is intentionally excluded at this simula-tion stage, as deep learning inference power consump-tion is highly variable and heavily dependent on the final embedded edge AI hardware selected for physical deployment. 

5.2.2. Quantitative Macroscopic Performance 

Fig. 10 presents the distribution of visited sectors across the 100 validation tests for all three evaluated ap-proaches. The baseline LiDAR approach, exploiting its 

> 6https://www.application-datasheet.com/pdf/makeblock/81340.pdf
> 7http://bucket.download.slamtec.com/b90ae0a89feba3756bc5aaa0654c296d LD108_SLAMTEC_rplidar_datasheet_A1M8_v2.2_en.pdf
> 8https://www.opensourceinstruments.com/Electronics/Data/IMX219PQ.pd

22 high-precision distance measurement capabilities, demon-strates consistently effective environment exploration, suc-cessfully visiting all 22 sectors on 33 occasions. Our 

πCEM collective controller significantly surpasses this milestone, achieving full 22-sector coverage in 55 of the 100 tests. However, the CEM controller registers a slightly lower av-erage number of visited sectors compared to the LiDAR baseline: 20.38 versus 20.91. As evidenced in Table 6, the πCM A −ES collective controller exhibits a more conservative per-formance profile, visiting an average of 19.44 sectors and achieving full coverage only 10 times. In terms of accumulated reward, both vision-based con-trollers register lower mean values than the LiDAR bench-mark: 4673.10 for CEM and 4587.92 for CMA-ES versus 5827.51 for LiDAR. However, consistent with our archi-tectural objectives, the vision-based approaches exhibit significantly superior energy efficiency. The πCEM collective 

controller consumes an average of 2316.93 Ws, and the 

πCM A −ES collective controller consumes 1987.14 Ws; both metrics are substantially lower than the LiDAR approach’s 3341.99 Ws. This energy advantage is crucial for real-world swarm robotics deployment. Using the πCM A −ES collective controller, the robots’ visual sen-sors are responsible for 10.02% of the total energy con-sumption per episode. In contrast, in the case of the base-line method, the consumption of LiDAR devices represents 39.47% of the total. Additionally, with the πCM A −ES collective 

controller, the motors of each mobile agent consume on average a lower percentage of the total compared to the CEM-trained controller: 89.98% versus 91.40%. This lat-ter aspect helps to explain why the πCEM collective controller facilitates the swarm to travel the greatest average dis-tance, 166.39 meters. Thus, it marginally surpasses the LiDAR approach’s 162.05 meters and clearly exceeds the CMA-ES controller, which allows our four robots to move an average of 157.58 meters per episode. Both vision-based controllers demonstrate superior safety performance compared to the baseline, achieving markedly lower average inter-agent collision rates: 2.69% for CEM and 2.41% for CMA-ES, compared to 4.68% for the LiDAR system. The higher inter-agent collision rate observed in the LiDAR system is likely attributable to inherent limitations in reliably identifying small, dynami-cally maneuvering objects due to scanning frequency con-straints relative to the robots’ velocity. This can generate temporarily unmonitored zones where collisions may oc-cur. While the mean values provide a primary indicator of exploration efficacy, assessing policy stability requires an-alyzing the variance in performance across independent runs. Derived from the distributions illustrated in Fig. 10, the standard deviation for the number of visited sec-tors is 3.05 for the πCEM collective controller and 1.94 for the 

πCM A −ES collective controller. In comparison, the classical LiDAR baseline exhibits a standard deviation of 1.10. As expected, the LiDAR-based navigation yields the highest stability due to its omnidirectional, high-precision geometric sensing. However, the πCEM collective policy demon-strates highly competitive consistency, achieving nearly identical spatial coverage despite relying solely on low-cost, partially observable visual representations processed through a latent VAE bottleneck. This confirms that the learned evolutionary policies achieve robust macroscopic stability while significantly reducing the hardware com-plexity and energy footprint of the swarm. 

5.2.3. Qualitative Behavioral Analysis 

Fig. 11 presents heatmaps illustrating the most fre-quently traversed positions in the corridor during the 100 validation tests, offering a qualitative assessment of the learned policies. By observing and representing these po-sitions, we seek to identify specific collective behaviors, implicit coordination strategies between agents, emergent exploration patterns, and the system’s adaptability to var-ious conditions of the environment. The visualization of the swarm’s movement patterns provides us with relevant information about the effectiveness of our policies, thus complementing the quantitative metrics. When interpreting these spatial distributions, it is es-sential to consider the continuous wandering nature of the evaluated task. Given the finite navigable area of the sim-ulated environment and the extended 5000-step duration of the validation episodes, the policies naturally and in-evitably produce redundant exploration, where regions are visited repeatedly by the swarm members. Consequently, high-density traversal areas should not be misconstrued as an algorithmic flaw or an inability to escape local optima. Rather, this redundancy is the expected macroscopic out-come of a robust survival task, where the underlying prior-ity is to maintain sustained, collision-free forward motion over prolonged periods. In our heatmaps, environment positions traversed 100 or more times by the mobile robots are represented in yel-low color at its maximum intensity. We established this specific limit to eliminate possible outliers from the point distribution shown in each heatmap, originated by a large number of collisions in certain areas of the environment. In contrast, the absolute absence of the yellow color indi-cates the corridor positions that were not traversed by the swarm on any occasion. As observed in Fig. 11a), the LiDAR-based policy ex-hibits a clearly identifiable helical movement pattern. It also shows a pronounced tendency to follow the upper lat-eral wall and avoid the lower edge, where static obsta-cles are concentrated, suggesting effective contour follow-ing and obstacle avoidance behavior. These two particular behaviors are characteristic of systems based on LiDAR devices. In contrast, the πCEM collective controller, corresponding to Fig. 11b), promotes a significantly more dispersed explo-ration pattern. This policy strongly favors forward actions, which, while inducing a slightly increased collision risk, proves highly effective for maximizing rapid environmen-tal coverage. This predisposition for advancement, along 23 Figure 10: Number of tests achieving specific numbers of visited sectors. This bar chart compares the collective exploration performance of the LiDAR baseline (in blue), the proposed vision-based controller trained with our CEM algorithm (in orange), and the proposed vision-based controller trained with our CMA-ES algorithm (in green) over 100 multi-agent reinforcement learning episodes. Table 6: Average test results for sectors explored, reward points, percentage of time with inter-robot collisions, traveled distance, and energy consumption. 

Method Sectors Reward Collisions (%) Distance (m) Consumption (Ws) 

LiDAR 20.91 5827.51 4.68 162.05 3341.99 CEM 20.38 4673.10 2.69 166.39 2316.93 CMA-ES 19.44 4587.92 2.41 157.58 1987.14 

with the recovery of robots after suffering a collision, ex-plains why this policy yielded the highest total distance traveled among all three evaluated approaches. The πCM A −ES collective controller, associated with Fig. 11c), ex-hibits an exploration pattern characterized by a lower con-centration of robots at the corridor extremes. The visually apparent increase in turning actions directly contributes to its superior safety performance but concurrently re-sults in a lower total distance traveled. The CMA-ES algorithm’s dynamic covariance matrix adaptation mech-anism, which is particularly efficient at exploring the solu-tion space (Yu et al., 2015), effectively optimized the pre-trained collision-free navigation weights for conservative safety without heavily biasing toward raw forward veloc-ity. 

5.2.4. Ablation Study: Impact of Collision Termination Rules on Exploration 

To rigorously evaluate the sensitivity of the learned poli-cies to environmental penalties, an ablation study was con-24 a) LiDAR 

# b) CEM 

# c) CMA-ES Figure 11: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps. This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment over 100 episodes, comparing the behaviors resulting from a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the policy obtained through our proposed cross-entropy method, and c) the policy generated using our proposed covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy. 

ducted. Specifically, we analyzed how the relaxation of the strict collision termination rule during the evaluation phase impacts the final exploration metrics. During the evolutionary training phase, any collision re-sulted in the immediate termination of the episode. How-ever, during standard evaluation, agents were permitted to recover and continue exploring after a collision, albeit with a severe discrete reward penalty. To isolate the behavioral impact of the termination rules, the neural controllers were not retrained for this ablation study. The evaluations were conducted using the exact policies that had already con-verged during the initial training phase. Table 7 compares the macroscopic performance of both vision-based policies, 

πCEM collective and πCM A −ES collective , under evaluation conditions with and without the ability to recover from collisions. The empirical results from this ablation study reveal profound structural differences in the emergent behaviors generated by our two evolution strategies. The πCEM collective 

controller’s tendency to aggressively predict forward com-mands translates into extensive spatial coverage, but it concurrently assumes a higher navigational risk. When 

> Table 7: Average test results for sectors explored and reward points obtained by the vision-based controllers with and without the ability to recover and continue navigation after a collision.

Evaluation Rule Method Sectors Reward 

With collision recovery CEM 20.38 4673.10 

With collision recovery CMA-ES 19.44 4587.92 Without collision recovery CEM 11.48 752.35 Without collision recovery CMA-ES 13.61 1427.84 

agents are permanently halted upon collision, the perfor-mance of the CEM policy degrades drastically, plummet-ing from 20.38 to a mere 11.48 mean sectors explored. The aggressive forward bias proves detrimental under strict zero-tolerance penalty conditions, as colliding robots be-come permanent static obstacles for the remainder of the episode, severing the swarm’s exploratory momentum. Conversely, the πCM A −ES collective controller demonstrates sig-nificantly higher intrinsic robustness under strict evalua-tion rules. As indicated by its qualitative heatmap ( i.e. ,25 Fig. 11c)), this policy favors a more conservative navi-gational profile, frequently executing turning commands to avoid close-quarters maneuvering near fixed objects. Because of this superior inherent obstacle avoidance, the CMA-ES policy suffers a markedly less severe degradation when collision recovery is disabled, achieving a mean of 13.61 explored sectors across 100 trials. Consequently, under strict termination constraints, the 

πCM A −ES collective controller actively outperforms the πCEM collective 

controller. This highlights that while our cross-entropy method converged upon a high-yield, high-risk exploration strategy dependent on the system’s tolerance for minor col-lisions, our covariance matrix adaptation evolution strat-egy successfully optimized for genuine, conservative safety. This confirms that the learned behaviors are highly sensi-tive to the reward architecture and that our hybrid evolu-tionary framework is capable of discovering diverse, valid solutions along the exploration-safety Pareto front depend-ing on the applied constraints. 

5.3. Statistical Analysis of Exploration Effectiveness 

To rigorously validate the quantitative results and pro-vide a robust assessment of overall exploration efficacy, we conducted a statistical analysis focusing on the number of sectors visited, which serves as the primary indicator of spatial coverage. We used Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) 

post hoc test (Nanda et al., 2021). The Tukey HSD test is appropriate for simultaneous pairwise comparisons and de-termines the statistical significance of differences between multiple group means using an adjusted p-value. This value incorporates a correction that controls the family-wise error rate at a specified significance level α, which is essential when performing multiple simultaneous compar-isons. We set the significance level α = 0 .05 and a 95% Con-fidence Interval (CI) for the difference between the means of each pair, represented by lower and upper bounds. If the confidence interval does not include zero, one can de-termine that the difference between the compared means is statistically significant. The same conclusion can be reached if the adjusted p-value obtained is below the estab-lished significance level (Nanda et al., 2021). The results of our Tukey HSD test are presented in Table 8. The analysis yielded the following critical findings: • CEM vs LiDAR : The adjusted p-value of 0.2008 

exceeds the threshold α = 0 .05 , and the confidence interval [−1.2575 , 0.1975] includes zero. This con-firms the impossibility of rejecting the null hypothesis of equality between means and indicates no statisti-cally significant difference between both approaches in terms of exploratory capacity. • CMA-ES vs LiDAR : The adjusted p-value is below 

0.001 , and the confidence interval [−2.1975 , −0.7425] 

lies entirely in the negative domain. This demon-strates a statistically significant difference and con-firms that the performance of the LiDAR approach significantly exceeds the πCM A −ES collective controller by a mean of 1.47 sectors. • CMA-ES vs CEM : Similarly, a statistically sig-nificant difference exists between the πCEM collective and 

πCM A −ES collective controllers, as demonstrated by the ad-justed p-value of 0.0072 . The confidence interval 

[−1.6675 , −0.2125] confirms that the πCEM collective con-troller’s performance is significantly superior, with a mean difference of 0.94 sectors explored. These statistical findings corroborate the qualitative and quantitative observations: the πCEM collective controller achieves performance statistically comparable to the con-ventional LiDAR-based system in terms of exploratory ca-pacity. This result is highly relevant as it validates the vi-ability of using low-cost, energy-efficient monocular vision systems for complex autonomous navigation tasks, offering a critical advantage over the heavier and more expensive distance sensors typically employed. 

6. Analysis of Swarm Robotics Properties 

This section undertakes a systematic analysis of three essential properties inherent to the collective behaviors generated by the proposed swarm robotic controllers, 

πCEM collective and πCM A −ES collective : robustness, flexibility, and scal-ability. The rigorous evaluation of these properties is paramount, as they determine the viability and effective-ness of deploying such controllers within physical swarm robotic systems operating in real-world conditions. It is imperative to emphasize that the final policies eval-uated throughout this experimental phase are deployed exactly as they were obtained at the culmination of the evolutionary training process detailed in Section 5. To strictly evaluate the true generalization bounds and inher-ent properties of the macroscopic model, these controllers undergo a rigorous zero-shot transfer across all experimen-tal scenarios. Specifically, the policies are not retrained, fine-tuned, or adapted in any capacity to accommodate the novel evaluation conditions. This direct deployment demonstrates that the learned behavioral parameters are intrinsically robust, flexible, and scalable, validating the efficiency of the proposed approach for practical imple-mentations without requiring computationally expensive retraining phases. Furthermore, a methodological distinction must be clar-ified regarding the reporting of the evaluation metrics in this section compared to the previous one. Having estab-lished the baseline policy stability and variance profiles in Section 5, this section shifts the analytical focus to-ward macroscopic performance trends under environmen-tal stress. Specifically, the following evaluations of robust-ness, flexibility, and scalability utilize mean performance 26 Table 8: Results of the Tukey HSD test for comparing means of sectors explored by the three collective autonomous navigation controllers evaluated. 

Comparison Difference p-Value Confidence Interval (95%) Significant 

CEM vs LiDAR -0.53 0.2008 [-1.2575, 0.1975] No CMA-ES vs LiDAR -1.47 0.0 [-2.1975, -0.7425] Yes CMA-ES vs CEM -0.94 0.0072 [-1.6675, -0.2125] Yes metrics across 100 trials to quantify the expected systemic degradation or scaling capacity when the swarm is sub-jected to novel conditions. Consistent with the comparative analysis presented in Section 5, we utilize the previously established LiDAR-based collective autonomous navigation controller as a benchmark reference. The primary experimental environ-ment remains the synthetic indoor corridor detailed in Fig. 5. However, to rigorously assess the controllers’ adaptabil-ity, we introduce three additional synthetic environments, modeled using our high-fidelity physics simulator. Each new environment incorporates significant structural mod-ifications designed to challenge the swarm’s adaptive ca-pabilities. These environments, representing distinct in-terior spaces commonly found in real buildings, introduce progressively complex variations from the original training corridor and feature varying numbers of navigable sectors, as outlined in Table 9.  

> Table 9: Synthetic environments used to evaluate the robustness, flexibility, and scalability of the developed robotic swarm.

Identifier Name Sectors 

(0) Original corridor 22 (1) Corridor with corner 26 (2) Corridor with intersection 30 (3) Corridor with passage 33 Regarding the topological complexity of the evaluation scenarios, the original training environment and the three novel alternative layouts introduced for flexibility testing systematically challenge the swarm’s navigation capabili-ties. These environments inherently feature narrow pas-sages, structural bottlenecks, and severe visual occlusions (e.g. , sharp corners and intersecting corridors). Success-fully navigating these features validates the robustness and generalization capability of the proposed exploration method under restricted spatial conditions. The validation of robustness, flexibility, and scalabil-ity necessitates extensive experimentation under diverse conditions, involving multiple agents and environmental variations. Conducting such large-scale experiments with physical multi-robot systems presents significant practical challenges. These challenges include substantial costs in terms of time and resources, inherent risks of equipment damage and environmental harm, difficulties in ensuring exact reproducibility due to uncontrolled environmental factors, and logistical complexities associated with man-aging and coordinating numerous physical agents, partic-ularly when testing scalability with large swarm sizes. Consequently, employing realistic physics simulations offers a highly advantageous alternative for this phase of evaluation. Simulation allows for risk-free exploration of potentially hazardous behaviors, provides significant tem-poral and economic efficiencies enabling a far greater num-ber of tests, and ensures high reproducibility through pre-cise control over experimental conditions. Furthermore, it facilitates the rapid generation and modification of diverse environmental scenarios, enables straightforward scalabil-ity testing with varying numbers of agents, and permits the systematic examination of system behavior under a breadth of configurations and controlled perturbations that would be impracticable in physical settings. This simulation-based validation is particularly valuable for rig-orously assessing the fundamental properties required for successful real-world deployment in swarm robotics. Our analysis is structured into three distinct evaluation processes: • A robustness evaluation process, detailed in Subsec-tion 6.1, assessing the system’s resilience to sensory perturbations, simulating common real-world sensor noise and variability. • A flexibility evaluation process, described in Subsec-tion 6.2, examining the system’s capacity to adapt and perform effectively across various novel and unknown environments. • A scalability evaluation process, presented in Subsec-tion 6.3, analyzing the system’s performance charac-teristics as the number of constituent agents is varied. The insights gained from these evaluations are crucial for understanding the controllers’ potential and limitations regarding practical, real-world applicability. 

6.1. Robustness 

The evaluation of robustness is a cornerstone in the de-velopment of swarm robotic models intended for operation in inherently uncertain and dynamic real-world environ-ments. Robustness, within the context of swarm robotics, refers to the system’s inherent capacity to maintain stable and effective performance despite internal failures ( e.g. ,agent loss) or external perturbations (Şahin, 2005). Vari-ous methodologies can be employed to assess this critical property, including the simulation of agent failures, the modification of environmental parameters, or, as adopted 27 in this study, the introduction of noise into the agents’ sensory observations. In physical robotic swarm deployments based on low-cost hardware, sensory perception is inherently flawed. Consequently, evaluating the robustness of the learned navigation policies is not merely a test of basic collision avoidance, but a strict assessment of the framework’s re-silience against the intrinsic uncertainty of reinforcement learning under partial observability. Operating exclusively on highly compressed visual latent representations, the agents lack global state information. To systematically evaluate how noise in visual observa-tions affects final performance, we subjected the zero-shot transferred controllers to varying levels of Gaussian noise applied directly to their perceptual inputs. This controlled injection of sensory noise acts as a preliminary domain ran-domization technique (Muratore et al., 2022). By deliber-ately corrupting the visual data, we emulate the percep-tual uncertainty typical of physical camera sensors. This approach quantifies the impact of partial observability on policy optimality, demonstrating whether the agents can sustain their emergent collective behaviors when the reli-ability of their environmental perception is systematically degraded. Furthermore, the injection of Gaussian noise holds par-ticular relevance for controllers reliant on monocular vi-sion, as it effectively simulates the types of sensory vari-ability commonly encountered in real-world conditions. Such variability can arise from fluctuations in ambient illu-mination, partial occlusions of the visual field, or inherent imperfections and limitations of the camera sensors them-selves. In the broader context of robotic visual navigation, uncertainty originating from sensor data frequently mani-fests as noise, potentially caused by factors including ran-dom environmental perturbations, inadequate light levels, suboptimal device operating temperatures (Yogesh et al., 2017), electromagnetic interference, or even minor vibra-tions and unintentional movements of the robotic plat-form. A controller’s ability to maintain performance de-spite such noisy input is a strong indicator of its potential for reliable real-world operation. In our robustness evaluation protocol, we systematically introduce additive Gaussian noise to the input sensory data at three distinct levels: 5%, 10%, and 15% of the signal range. For the vision-based controllers, πCEM collective 

and πCM A −ES collective , this noise is applied directly to the pix-els of the input RGB images prior to processing by the VAE encoder. For the LiDAR-based baseline controller, equivalent noise percentages are injected into the distance measurements provided by the simulated laser scanner. This graduated introduction of noise allows us to metic-ulously assess whether, and to what extent, the perfor-mance of each controller degrades as the level of sensory perturbation increases, providing critical insights into their resilience and suitability for deployment in unpredictable real-world settings. The qualitative impact of noise injection is visualized through heatmaps representing the positions traversed by the swarm robots over 100 consecutive MARL episodes for each noise level. A comparative analysis reveals dis-tinct responses among the controllers. In the case of the CEM-trained controller, the degradation in performance is marginal, even at the highest noise level. As illustrated in Fig. 12b), with 5% noise, the exploration pattern remains remarkably similar to the noise-free baseline shown in Fig. 11b), exhibiting relatively uniform coverage of the corri-dor. Even with 10% and 15% noise, while subtle changes like a slightly higher concentration along the upper edge emerge, the overall exploration pattern remains consistent and effective, as evidenced in Fig. 13b) and Fig. 14b). Similarly, the LiDAR-based controller demonstrates con-siderable robustness, maintaining its characteristic helical movement pattern and contour-following behavior with minimal perceptible degradation across the tested noise levels. In stark contrast, the performance degradation is no-tably evident for the controller trained via our CMA-ES algorithm. As observed in Fig. 12c), at 5% noise, the pattern resembles the noise-free case shown in Fig. 11c), suggesting tolerance to low-level perturbations. However, at 10% noise, corresponding to Fig. 13c), discernible differ-ences appear, with agents showing a tendency to traverse positions nearer the corridor extremes and the lower edge, a significant deviation from the noise-free behavior. As evidenced in Fig. 14c), this tendency becomes more pro-nounced at 15% noise, indicating a substantial alteration of the emergent behavioral pattern. This shift towards navigating regions with higher concentrations of fixed ob-stacles inherently increases the probability of collisions and signifies a considerable loss of performance effectiveness under higher sensory uncertainty. The quantitative results, summarized in Table 10, align coherently with these qualitative observations. The 

πCEM collective controller demonstrates remarkable resilience. At 5% noise, it achieves an average accumulated reward of 4221.22 points and explores a mean of 20.61 sectors, results highly comparable to its noise-free performance: 4673.10 points and 20.38 sectors, from Table 6. Even at higher noise levels of 10% and 15%, while there is a discernible decrease in average reward and a slight increase in inter-robot collision time percentage, the controller maintains strong exploration capability, visiting an average of 20.66 and 19.97 sectors, respectively. Notably, in these higher noise scenarios, it even surpasses the LiDAR baseline in terms of average sectors explored. Additionally, the πCEM collective controller exhibits consistent stability in the total distance traveled, maintaining mean values around 160 meters across all noise levels, consis-tently outperforming the baseline approach in this met-ric. This stability likely stems from its inherent tendency to favor forward actions, a bias that remains effective for exploration even when visual input contains inaccuracies, without leading to a catastrophic increase in collisions with dynamic obstacles. 28 a) LiDAR 

# b) CEM 

# c) CMA-ES Figure 12: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 5% noise. This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (0) over 100 episodes with 5% Gaussian noise added to sensory inputs, comparing behaviors from a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

Conversely, the πCM A −ES collective controller shows a progres-sive and significant decline in performance as noise lev-els increase. Its average accumulated reward drops from 3142.97 at 5% noise to a mere 535.67 at 15% noise, with the average number of explored sectors decreasing from 18.65 to 9.81 over the same range. This controller exhibits particularly pronounced sensitivity in terms of distance traveled, which plummets from 136.91 meters at 5% noise to 89.68 meters at 15% noise. This behavior reinforces the qualitative observation that sensory uncertainty amplifies its natural inclination towards turning actions, leading to less effective, sometimes circular or serpentine, trajectories that severely limit spatial exploration. Concurrently, the average inter-robot collision rate deteriorates, rising from 1.99% at 5% noise to 5.26% at 15% noise. While the πCM A −ES collective controller consistently maintains the highest energy efficiency across all scenarios, which is directly correlated with its lower average traveled dis-tance, its overall effectiveness is substantially inferior to the πCEM collective controller. This is notably evident under high noise conditions where excessive turning can lead to robots rotating in place. This suggests a perturbation threshold beyond which its navigational capabilities be-come significantly compromised. The LiDAR-based approach, while robust in maintain-ing its general exploration pattern, proves to be the least efficient and demonstrates increasing vulnerability regard-ing safety as noise intensifies. Its average inter-robot col-lision rate escalates from 4.10% at 5% noise to 6.25% at 15% noise. This susceptibility highlights the critical de-pendence of LiDAR on precise distance measurements for avoiding obstacles, particularly dynamic ones. Sensory noise appears to exacerbate its inherent limitations in reli-ably detecting other small, potentially fast-moving swarm members, especially those moving in trajectories perpen-dicular to the sensor beam or maneuvering abruptly. In summary, the robustness analysis underscores the superior resilience of the πCEM collective controller to sensory noise compared to both the πCM A −ES collective controller and, sig-nificantly, the LiDAR baseline in terms of safety, specif-ically regarding inter-robot collisions, and distance trav-eled. Its ability to maintain effective exploration and rel-29 a) LiDAR 

# b) CEM 

# c) CMA-ES Figure 13: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 10% noise. This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (0) over 100 episodes with 10% Gaussian noise added to sensory inputs, comparing behaviors from a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. Table 10: Average robustness test results across different noise levels for sectors explored, reward points, percentage of time with inter-robot collisions, traveled distance, and energy consumption. 

Noise Method Sectors Reward Collisions (%) Distance (m) Consumption (Ws) 

5% LiDAR 20.76 5305.83 4.10 154.82 3367.04 5% CEM 20.61 4221.22 2.42 165.15 2862.62 5% CMA-ES 18.65 3142.97 1.99 136.91 2113.32 

10% LiDAR 19.76 4174.42 5.26 133.09 3614.75 10% CEM 20.66 3723.24 3.01 159.79 2367.03 10% CMA-ES 15.58 1631.54 3.09 109.89 1979.73 

15% LiDAR 19.63 4016.93 6.25 125.57 3320.41 15% CEM 19.97 4099.51 2.94 166.78 2525.79 15% CMA-ES 9.81 535.67 5.26 89.68 1780.48 

atively low collision rates despite substantial input per-turbations makes it a particularly promising candidate for real-world deployment where such conditions are common-place. Beyond the empirical resilience to visual perturbations, ensuring successful sim-to-real transferability requires ad-dressing hardware-specific challenges, primarily onboard inference latency and actuation uncertainty. The pro-posed architecture mitigates inference latency through its extreme dimensionality reduction; by compressing high-dimensional pixel data into a 32-element latent vector via the VAE, the subsequent control inference relies solely on an ultra-compact, lightweight MLP. This enables high-frequency control loops even on resource-constrained mi-croprocessors without specialized AI accelerators. Moreover, the system’s robustness to actuation uncer-30 a) LiDAR 

# b) CEM 

# c) CMA-ES Figure 14: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 15% noise. This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (0) over 100 episodes with 15% Gaussian noise added to sensory inputs, comparing behaviors from a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

tainty, such as unmodeled motor friction, asymmetrical wheel slip, or kinematic drift, is intrinsically supported by the memoryless, reactive nature of the MLP controller. Because the policy maps instantaneous visual feedback di-rectly to kinematic commands frame-by-frame, without re-lying on complex historical states or dead-reckoning odom-etry, the robotic agents can dynamically and continuously correct for mechanical execution errors in real time. 

6.2. Flexibility 

The evaluation of flexibility in swarm robotic models is a critical step toward developing collective, adaptable, and effective systems suitable for real-world deployment. This property determines a swarm’s capacity to operate effectively in dynamic and unknown environments, a fun-damental prerequisite for practical applications where sce-narios are often highly variable and unpredictable. One of the most effective methodologies for assessing flexibility involves exposing the swarm to diverse and challenging en-vironments that differ significantly from those encountered during the training phase. Realistic physics simulators provide an invaluable and indispensable tool for this purpose. They facilitate the rapid generation and modification of a wide variety of en-vironmental conditions, enabling a more exhaustive and systematic evaluation of controller flexibility than would be logistically feasible or economically viable with physi-cal hardware. For vision-based controllers specifically, this simulation-based approach permits a rigorous examination of the system’s adaptability to substantial structural and compositional changes ( e.g. , new layouts and novel ob-stacles) without altering the fundamental nature of the sensory input data. When the structure, number, or po-sition of objects diverge from the training scenario, the swarm must demonstrate high flexibility, forcing individu-als to adopt strategies that may differ from those initially learned. In our investigation, we modeled three distinct synthetic environments to validate the flexibility of the controllers, which were previously trained and evaluated exclusively in the original corridor, shown in Fig. 5. These new testbeds correspond to indoor corridors (1), (2), and (3), as pre-31 2143658710 912 11 14 13 16 15 18 17 20 19 22 21                                                                             

> 012345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X
> 012345678910 11
> 23 24 25 26
> Y
> 2143658710 912 11 14 13 16 15 18 17 20 19 22 21
> 012345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X
> 012345678910 11
> 23 24 25 26 28 27 30 29
> a) Corridor with Corner
> Y
> b) Corridor with Intersection
> 21548711 10 14 13 17 16 19 20 22 23 25 26 28 29 31 32
> 012345678910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 X
> 012345678910 11
> 36912 15 18 21 24 27 30 33
> c) Corridor with Passage
> Y

Figure 15: New synthetic environments for flexibility analysis. This figure illustrates the division of the three novel simulated environments into discrete sectors (in green) with their corresponding indices for quantitative evaluation. The coordinate axes correspond to three distinct interior spaces: a) a corridor with a corner, b) a corridor with an intersection, and c) a corridor with a narrow passage. 

sented in Table 9 and graphically represented in Fig. 15. Analysis of the navigational trajectory heatmaps for each environment reveals distinctive patterns in the explo-ration conducted by both the LiDAR-based multi-robot system and our vision-based swarm robotic controllers, 

πCEM collective and πCM A −ES collective . In the corridor with a corner, as shown in Fig. 16, all three tested controllers promote relatively broad coverage of the environment. However, the πCEM collective controller exhibits a distinct advantage in exploring peripheral areas. This advantage is particularly pronounced in the novel secondary corridor ( i.e. , the nav-igable sectors not present in the training environment), especially in the positions surrounding a brown bookshelf, an object category not encountered during the training phase. In contrast, the positions most frequently traversed by robots using the πCM A −ES collective controller tend to concen-trate in the central areas of the main corridor. Fig. 17 illustrates more marked differences between the behaviors deployed by the three controllers in the corridor with an intersection. The πCM A −ES collective controller favors navi-32 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 16: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps in environment (1). This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated corridor with a corner over 100 episodes. This flexibility assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

gation along the main corridor, as evidenced by the higher quantity of traversals represented by maximum-intensity yellow in these regions. Conversely, the πCEM collective con-troller tends to concentrate its navigational activity in the secondary, intersecting corridor, resulting in a less exhaus-tive exploration of the main corridor. This tendency is even more pronounced with the LiDAR-based controller, which promotes much more exhaustive coverage of the sec-ondary corridor, often at the expense of the main one. No-tably, this controller continues to exhibit the helical move-ment pattern that was clearly identifiable in the initial tests conducted in the original environment (0). The corridor with a narrow central passage presents a significant navigational challenge for all three controllers. As demonstrated in Fig. 18, the πCEM collective controller pro-motes a notably more homogeneous spatial coverage, facil-itating the exploration of more distant and hard-to-access areas. The LiDAR-based controller shows similar behav-ior while additionally enabling highly effective contour-tracking of the interior space. In contrast, the πCM A −ES collective 

controller concentrates its most frequently traversed posi-tions around the central passage itself. It is noteworthy that all three deployed behaviors demonstrate effective collision-free navigation through this restrictive passage, validating their capability to handle narrow chokepoints. From a quantitative perspective, the results presented in Table 11 show that the controller trained with the CEM al-gorithm accumulates significantly higher average rewards compared to the πCM A −ES collective controller across all three novel environments. The πCEM collective controller’s tendency to pre-33 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 17: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps in environment (2). This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated corridor with an intersection over 100 episodes. This flexibility assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

dict forward commands, which provide the highest reward points, makes it particularly well-suited for environments (2) and (3) with their larger navigable surfaces and open spaces. This predisposition is also responsible for the in-creased average distance traveled by the swarm in these two environments. However, this forward bias can be counterproductive in areas with a high concentration of complex obstacles. This limitation becomes apparent in the four-cornered intersection of environment (2), where robots controlled by the πCEM collective policy experience diffi-culties. This specific structural peculiarity is responsible for the increase in the percentage of time with inter-agent collisions per episode observed for all three collective nav-igation policies in this environment. During the 100 MARL episodes conducted across all three new corridors, the πCEM collective controller achieves su-perior average results in terms of explored sectors com-pared to the πCM A −ES collective controller. This success stems 34 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 18: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps in environment (3). This figure illustrates the number of times four robots traversed different positions in the simulated corridor with a passage over 100 episodes. This flexibility assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

from its forward action tendency combined with the eval-uation phase’s allowance for recovery after collisions. This advantage proves decisive in the corridor with a narrow passage, whose structure presents the greatest divergence from the training environment. In this scenario, the 

πCEM collective controller obtains its most notable advantage over the πCM A −ES collective controller. Additionally, the controller trained through our CEM algorithm stands out for its over-all balance between safety and exploration, recording the lowest mean rates of collision with moving obstacles in all three scenarios while maintaining competitive traveled dis-tances. Its behavior in corridor (3) is particularly notable, where only 0.78% of each episode’s duration involves inter-agent collisions. The controller trained using our cross-entropy method even surpasses the LiDAR-based controller in the flexibil-ity experiment within the intersecting corridor (2), achiev-ing an average of 21.61 explored regions and 165.69 meters 35 Table 11: Average flexibility test results across different environments for sectors explored, reward points, percentage of time with inter-robot collisions, traveled distance, and energy consumption. 

Corridor Method Sectors Reward Collisions (%) Distance (m) Consumption (Ws) 

(1) LiDAR 24.83 7177.43 1.92 193.27 3252.71 (1) CEM 21.54 4493.92 1.64 156.60 2248.05 (1) CMA-ES 18.42 2335.72 2.20 118.79 2087.76 

(2) LiDAR 20.41 5509.19 3.76 154.49 2887.14 (2) CEM 21.61 5177.19 1.76 165.69 1781.02 

(2) CMA-ES 18.49 1842.17 2.55 113.78 1809.04 (3) LiDAR 31.19 7911.72 1.86 211.46 3596.15 (3) CEM 22.53 6133.70 0.78 186.27 2370.74 (3) CMA-ES 13.21 703.56 2.06 79.89 1815.67 

traveled compared to the reference approach’s 20.41 sec-tors and 154.49 meters. This superiority primarily results from the πCEM collective controller’s greater spatial coverage of the main corridor in that specific environment. Neverthe-less, the LiDAR-based controller outperforms both vision-based controllers in the remaining experiments in terms of visited sectors, accumulated reward, and traveled dis-tance. This superior performance, which comes at the cost of significantly higher energy consumption, stems from the sensor’s high precision in measuring distances to static ob-stacles, typically resulting in more fluid navigation. Finally, the controller obtained through our CMA-ES algorithm stands out for preserving its characteristic en-ergy efficiency, as shown in Table 11, but at the cost of a substantial reduction in the distance traveled per episode. This is especially critical in the corridor with a narrow passage, where the swarm travels an average of only 79.89 meters. This behavior demonstrates how its predisposition to turning actions proves ineffective in spatial configura-tions, such as the aforementioned narrow passage, where maneuverability is severely limited and predominantly rec-tilinear progression is required. 

6.3. Scalability 

Scalability evaluation is a vital component in the vali-dation of multi-robot systems, including artificial swarms. This property determines the system’s capacity to main-tain or enhance its performance as the number of con-stituent agents changes. The importance of scalability is widely recognized in scientific literature (Asiain and Godoy, 2020), as it is a fundamental prerequisite for deploying swarms in large-scale, real-world applications. Testing a vision-only controller with varying swarm sizes provides valuable insights into its adaptability and coordi-nation capabilities under different agent densities. Conducting such scalability evaluations with large num-bers of physical robots is often prohibitively expensive and logistically complex. Simulation-based validation is, there-fore, particularly valuable in swarm robotics, as it permits the systematic examination of system behavior under a wide range of configurations and agent densities. This ap-proach enables an assessment of performance from a few agents to many, a task that would be impracticable in physical environments due to constraints of time, cost, and logistics. In our evaluation, we analyze system performance with swarms of 2, 8, and 16 robots, providing insights into both reduction and significant increase scenarios compared to the original 4-robot training configuration. It must be explicitly reiterated that neither πCEM collective nor πCM A −ES collective 

were retrained, fine-tuned, or adapted in any capacity for these new configurations. A truly scalable system should maintain consistent and effective performance across these variations. We selected synthetic environment (3), the cor-ridor with a narrow passage, for this scalability analysis. This environment is particularly appropriate due to its larger navigable surface area and complex structure, which offers a more diverse exploration space suitable for larger swarms while minimizing artificial congestion. Further-more, its narrow central passage provides an additional challenge to test coordinated navigation in high-density situations. The test results reveal notable effects on exploration as the swarm size changes, as evidenced in Table 12. With a 2-robot swarm, the πCEM collective controller shows an ex-pected reduction in average accumulated reward, explored sectors, and traveled distance compared to the 4-robot configuration. Specifically, the 2-robot swarm achieves 2976.72 reward points, 18.24 explored sectors, and 91.25 meters traveled whereas the 4-robot swarm reaches 6133.70 points, 22.53 sectors, and 186.27 meters. Notably, halving the number of robots does not halve the exploratory cov-erage, indicating positive scalability characteristics even in reduction. The πCM A −ES collective controller exhibits a more pro-nounced, though expected, performance decrease in this scenario. Qualitatively, as shown in Fig. 19, both con-trollers maintain exploration patterns similar to their 4-robot counterparts. The πCEM collective policy promotes a more dispersed exploration, reaching peripheral positions, while the πCM A −ES collective policy favors curved trajectories, resulting in exhaustive coverage of central areas. Increasing the swarm size to eight robots yields sub-stantial improvements in accumulated reward and total distance traveled for both controllers, alongside moder-36 Table 12: Average scalability test results across different swarm sizes for sectors explored, reward points, percentage of time with inter-robot collisions, traveled distance, and energy consumption. 

Robots Method Sectors Reward Collisions (%) Distance (m) Consumption (Ws) 

2 LiDAR 28.64 4198.51 0.37 111.96 1803.83 2 CEM 18.24 2976.72 0.13 91.25 1144.42 2 CMA-ES 9.33 337.84 0.45 38.14 843.78 

8 LiDAR 32.71 15540.27 6.81 419.95 7348.64 8 CEM 25.09 12147.43 4.35 373.93 4827.89 8 CMA-ES 16.71 2124.36 11.29 177.44 3654.71 

16 LiDAR 33.00 29306.89 20.25 796.61 14539.18 16 CEM 27.77 23719.90 15.95 735.47 9129.75 16 CMA-ES 22.55 4810.51 34.57 381.75 7533.37 

ate increases in the average number of explored sectors. The πCEM collective controller’s coverage increases from 22.53 to 25.09 sectors, while the πCM A −ES collective controller’s rises from 13.21 to 16.71. It is critical to note that each ad-ditional robot also acts as a dynamic obstacle, signifi-cantly increasing the probability of inter-agent collisions. This factor likely explains the modest improvement in ex-plored regions despite a doubled swarm size. Qualitatively, the heatmaps in Fig. 20 show broad environment cov-erage, which becomes nearly complete for the πCEM collective 

controller. This policy’s pattern is visibly more uniform, whereas the πCM A −ES collective controller maintains a more focused area coverage. With 16-robot configurations, both approaches demon-strate considerable further performance improvements in exploration. The πCEM collective controller achieves a remark-able average reward of 23719.90 points, travels 735.47 me-ters, and explores 27.77 sectors, while the πCM A −ES collective con-troller attains 4810.51 points, 381.75 meters, and 22.55 sectors. This latter value represents a significant improve-ment from its 16.71-sector performance with eight robots. These results suggest the 16-agent configuration may be optimal for our vision-based controller in corridor (3), as larger swarms can better exploit inherent redundancy to counteract potential collisions. However, as expected, the mean rate of inter-robot col-lisions increases substantially, reaching 34.57% for the 

πCM A −ES collective controller. Its inherent tendency to select turning actions becomes counterproductive in restricted spaces with high agent density, which generates unpre-dictable trajectories. Total energy consumption also scales significantly, exceeding 14500 Ws for the LiDAR-based method. Qualitatively, as observed in Fig. 21, the 16-robot swarms achieve near-complete environment cover-age. The πCEM collective controller successfully explores all 33 sectors in 32 of the 100 episodes, and all agents in both policies successfully navigate the central narrow passage. As evidenced by the quantitative results detailed above, the system exhibits a fundamental trade-off inherent to decentralized swarm robotics: the balance between spatial coverage effectiveness and multi-agent interference. While the raw exploration capacity naturally scales with the ad-dition of agents, the marginal utility per robot ( i.e. , the net increase in spatial coverage contributed by each sup-plementary agent) is bounded by the increased frequency of inter-agent encounters in confined spaces (Asiain and Godoy, 2020), a dynamic clearly reflected in the perfor-mance variations between the 8 and 16-robot swarms. Despite this anticipated interference, a highly relevant qualitative emergent property observed alongside these quantitative metrics is the spontaneous resolution of multi-robot gridlocks in high-density configurations. In densely populated narrow corridors, reactive homogeneous swarms can fall into perpetual deadlocks due to symmetrical spa-tial conflicts. However, the proposed framework naturally breaks these symmetries without the injection of artificial sensory noise. Even though all agents execute identical deterministic policies during a given trial, the continuous nature of the simulation physics and the microscopic spa-tial asymmetries in their initial trajectories prevent perfect symmetrical lock-ups. Because the visual perceptions are inherently dependent on the continuous coordinate space, each individual agent experiences a uniquely angled, sub-pixel viewpoint of the congestion. This microscopic heterogeneity in their mo-mentary latent representations leads to divergent collision-avoidance maneuvers. Consequently, the swarm fluidly dissipates congestion without requiring explicit inter-agent communication, demonstrating that the behavioral param-eters learned by the macroscopic model are intrinsically scalable and structurally robust against severe density fluc-tuations. In summary, the LiDAR-based controller demonstrates exceptional scalability in terms of raw exploration, achiev-ing 100% coverage ( i.e. , 33 sectors) in all 100 tests with 16 robots. This highlights its superior precision in navigat-ing static obstacles. The πCEM collective controller achieves the closest, though still inferior, exploration results. However, a critical distinction emerges in safety: our vision-based CEM-trained controller presents the lowest average colli-sion rates with dynamic obstacles across all scenarios. This robust resistance to performance degradation, even in high density, suggests the vision-based policy can process rich contextual information, distinguish between other robots 37 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 19: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 2 robots. This figure illustrates the number of times two robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (3) over 100 episodes. This scalability assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

and fixed obstacles, and adapt its forward-biased behavior accordingly. This scalability in safety and efficiency is a crucial finding for real-world swarm deployment. 

6.4. Comparative Statistical Analysis and Discussion 

This subsection presents a comprehensive statistical analysis and comparative discussion of the swarm robotic properties evaluated in this section. We examine the ex-perimental results from Subsections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 us-ing a rigorous statistical methodology to formally assess the relative robustness, flexibility, and scalability of our generated controllers. The following discussion provides critical insights into the performance characteristics of the 

πCEM collective and πCM A −ES collective policies, benchmarked against the conventional LiDAR-based approach. The experiments have confirmed that our macroscopic model, trained via neuro-evolution, successfully addresses the challenges of collective visual exploration. Both the 38 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 20: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 8 robots. This figure illustrates the number of times eight robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (3) over 100 episodes. This scalability assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

CEM and CMA-ES algorithms demonstrated the capacity to generate effective swarm robotic controllers for naviga-tion in uncertain environments, although their resultant performance characteristics were markedly distinct. Following the statistical methodology established in Subsection 5.3, we first analyzed the robustness of the pro-posed navigation approaches under different sensory noise conditions. The Tukey HSD test results, presented in Ta-ble 13, yield critical conclusions regarding the exploration effectiveness of our vision-based controllers. The statistical analysis consistently demonstrated the 

πCEM collective controller’s superior exploration capability com-pared to the πCM A −ES collective controller across all noise levels. This performance gap became increasingly pronounced as the sensory noise intensified: the πCEM collective controller out-performed the πCM A −ES collective controller by a mean of 1.96 sec-tors at 5% noise, 5.08 sectors at 10% noise, and a substan-tial 10 .16 sectors at 15% noise. More importantly, when 39 a) LiDAR b) CEM c) CMA-ES Figure 21: Navigational trajectory frequency heatmaps with 16 robots. This figure illustrates the number of times sixteen robots traversed different positions in the simulated environment (3) over 100 episodes. This scalability assessment compares behaviors from: a) the LiDAR baseline, b) the proposed CEM-trained policy, and c) the proposed CMA-ES-trained policy. 

compared to the LiDAR benchmark, our CEM-trained controller showed no statistically significant difference at 5% and 15% noise levels. In a notable finding, with 10% noise, this vision-based controller demonstrated statisti-cally superior performance to the LiDAR approach by an average of 0.9 sectors. These results highlight the remarkable robustness of the CEM-trained controller. Its ability to maintain, and in one case exceed, the exploration effectiveness of the resource-intensive LiDAR system despite significant sensory pertur-bation is a crucial validation. This resilience is paramount for practical deployment in real-world environments, which are characterized by unpredictable sensory variability. The flexibility analysis, which employed the same sta-tistical framework, assessed the controllers’ adaptability to novel environmental configurations. The Tukey HSD test results, detailed in Table 14, reveal clear patterns. The πCEM collective controller’s superior exploration capabil-40 Table 13: Results of the Tukey HSD test for comparing means of sectors explored by the three collective autonomous navigation controllers evaluated under different Gaussian noise levels. 

Noise Comparison Difference p-Value Confidence Interval (95%) Significant 

5% CEM vs LiDAR -0.15 0.8726 [-0.8604, 0.5604] No 5% CMA-ES vs LiDAR -2.11 0.0 [-2.8204, -1.3996] Yes 5% CMA-ES vs CEM -1.96 0.0 [-2.6704, -1.2496] Yes 10% CEM vs LiDAR 0.9 0.0329 [0.0581, 1.7419] Yes 10% CMA-ES vs LiDAR -4.18 0.0 [-5.0219, -3.3381] Yes 10% CMA-ES vs CEM -5.08 0.0 [-5.9219, -4.2381] Yes 15% CEM vs LiDAR 0.34 0.6149 [-0.5113, 1.1913] No 15% CMA-ES vs LiDAR -9.82 0.0 [-10.6713, -8.9687] Yes 15% CMA-ES vs CEM -10.16 0.0 [-11.0113, -9.3087] Yes 

> Table 14: Results of the Tukey HSD test for comparing means of sectors explored by the three collective autonomous navigation controllers evaluated in novel, unknown environments.

Corridor Comparison Difference p-Value Confidence Interval (95%) Significant 

(1) CEM vs LiDAR -3.29 0.0 [-4.4961, -2.0839] Yes (1) CMA-ES vs LiDAR -6.41 0.0 [-7.6161, -5.2039] Yes (1) CMA-ES vs CEM -3.12 0.0 [-4.3261, -1.9139] Yes (2) CEM vs LiDAR 1.2 0.2998 [-0.704, 3.104] No (2) CMA-ES vs LiDAR -1.92 0.0476 [-3.824, -0.016] Yes (2) CMA-ES vs CEM -3.12 0.0004 [-5.024, -1.216] Yes (3) CEM vs LiDAR -8.66 0.0 [-10.0988, -7.2212] Yes (3) CMA-ES vs LiDAR -17.98 0.0 [-19.4188, -16.5412] Yes (3) CMA-ES vs CEM -9.32 0.0 [-10.7588, -7.8812] Yes ity over the πCM A −ES collective controller was consistent across all three new environments. This advantage was most pronounced in environment (3) ( i.e. , the corridor with a narrow passage), where it explored an average of 9.32 

more sectors. In comparison to the reference approach, the LiDAR benchmark performed significantly better in environments (1) ( i.e. , the corridor with a corner) and (3). However, in environment (2) ( i.e. , the corridor with an intersection), no statistically significant difference was found between the πCEM collective controller and the LiDAR ap-proach. The adjusted p-value of 0.2998 exceeds the thresh-old α = 0 .05 , which confirms the impossibility of rejecting the null hypothesis of equality between means. These findings underline the CEM-generated con-troller’s remarkable adaptability to different environmen-tal conditions, especially in our second flexibility exper-iment, where it achieves exploration efficacy statistically equivalent to the specialized LiDAR system in a struc-turally complex, unknown environment. This confirmed adaptability is essential for real-world applications where systems must be deployed in unmapped or dynamically changing spaces. Finally, the scalability analysis, alongside the corre-sponding Tukey HSD test results presented in Table 15, provided clear evidence of each controller’s ability to main-tain exploration efficacy with varying agent counts. The statistical analysis consistently demonstrated the CEM-trained controller’s superior exploration capability compared to the controller obtained through our CMA-ES algorithm across all swarm sizes. This advantage re-mained robust, with the πCEM collective controller outperform-ing the πCM A −ES collective controller by an average of 8.91 sectors with 2 robots, 8.38 sectors with 8 robots, and 5.22 sectors with 16 robots. When compared to the baseline approach, the LiDAR-based controller demonstrated statistically su-perior exploration in all scalability tests. However, a no-table and promising trend emerged: the performance gap between the πCEM collective controller and the LiDAR approach progressively narrowed as the swarm size increased, shrink-ing from a mean difference of 10 .40 sectors with 2 robots to 5.23 sectors with 16 robots. These results underscore the πCEM collective controller’s ef-fective scalability. Its improved relative performance in larger swarms suggests that our vision-based method be-comes increasingly competitive with traditional, resource-intensive sensor approaches in high-density, multi-agent deployments, strongly supporting its potential for large-scale collective navigation applications in the real world. 

7. Conclusions 

This study has presented specialized implementations of the cross-entropy method and the covariance matrix adap-tation evolution strategy tailored for multi-agent reinforce-ment learning. Through these evolutionary techniques, we have successfully developed two distinct autonomous navi-gation policies, establishing a novel hybrid method for the 41 Table 15: Results of the Tukey HSD test for comparing means of sectors explored by the three collective autonomous navigation controllers evaluated across different swarm sizes. 

Robots Comparison Difference p-Value Confidence Interval (95%) Significant 

2 CEM vs LiDAR -10.4 0.0 [-11.8718, -8.9282] Yes 2 CMA-ES vs LiDAR -19.31 0.0 [-20.7818, -17.8382] Yes 2 CMA-ES vs CEM -8.91 0.0 [-10.3818, -7.4382] Yes 8 CEM vs LiDAR -7.62 0.0 [-9.2031, -6.0369] Yes 8 CMA-ES vs LiDAR -16.0 0.0 [-17.5831, -14.4169] Yes 8 CMA-ES vs CEM -8.38 0.0 [-9.9631, -6.7969] Yes 16 CEM vs LiDAR -5.23 0.0 [-6.6737, -3.7863] Yes 16 CMA-ES vs LiDAR -10.45 0.0 [-11.8937, -9.0063] Yes 16 CMA-ES vs CEM -5.22 0.0 [-6.6637, -3.7763] Yes automatic design of collective behaviors for low-cost, re-active robotic swarms. The developed system, founded on advanced machine learning and an efficient neural architec-ture, demonstrates the ability to learn and deploy adaptive collective behaviors for visual exploration in challenging, dynamic environments. Our investigation has successfully addressed the five fundamental research questions posed in Section 1. The proposed hybrid automatic design method demonstrated its effectiveness in generating functional swarm robotic controllers for visual navigation tasks. The resulting controllers exhibited remarkable robustness against sen-sory perturbations and considerable flexibility in adapting to diverse environmental configurations not encountered during training. Scalability experiments confirmed that our approach remains effective as the number of agents varies, with performance improvements observed in larger swarms. Finally, our best vision-based controller achieved performance statistically comparable to traditional navi-gation methods employing more expensive sensors, vali-dating the viability of our low-cost, monocular-vision ap-proach. Across all experiments, our CEM-generated controller demonstrated superior efficacy for collective exploration, enabling the swarm to visit an average of 36.20% more regions than the controller obtained via the CMA-ES al-gorithm. Furthermore, while achieving exploration capa-bilities statistically comparable to a conventional LiDAR-based method, our best vision-based controller yielded a significant 31.40% average reduction in energy consump-tion. This energy efficiency is a critical finding, as it addresses the strict computational and power constraints inherent to low-cost swarm robotics. In an era increas-ingly dominated by large-scale, resource-intensive AI mod-els such as transformers, this research validates that archi-tectural efficiency is a practical and effective alternative for hardware-constrained domains like swarm robotics, estab-lishing a viable path for developing low-cost, autonomous collective intelligence. The positive results from this comprehensive analysis underscore the potential for deploying the proposed swarm model in real-world scenarios. The demonstrated robust-ness, flexibility, and scalability are fundamental proper-ties for practical applicability in complex and hazardous environments where multi-agent systems offer significant advantages over single-agent systems. This opens viable pathways for applications in fields such as search and res-cue in emergency situations, as well as environmental mon-itoring and precision agriculture. 

7.1. Limitations 

Despite the robust empirical performance of our hybrid neuro-evolutionary framework, several limitations must be acknowledged. First, due to the substantial computa-tional cost associated with multi-agent macroscopic sim-ulations, comprehensive ablation studies isolating the ex-act marginal contributions of specific architectural compo-nents, such as the individual terms of the reward function or the substitution of the perception module, were not per-formed. Second, while the system successfully demonstrated flex-ibility by generalizing to unseen corridor topologies with-out requiring computationally expensive retraining phases, as evidenced in Subsection 6.2, these test environments did not encompass extreme navigational challenges. Con-sequently, the generalization capability of the reactive con-trollers in drastically more complex scenarios featuring ex-treme occlusions, highly restrictive narrow passages, or dead ends requires further empirical validation. Finally, the current methodology relies exclusively on simulation-based training prior to physical deployment. The lack of online adaptation or incremental continual learning mechanisms constitutes a significant constraint. Addressing the feasibility of real-time evolutionary opti-mization on physical swarms presents profound safety chal-lenges; the stochastic weight mutations inherent to algo-rithms like CEM and CMA-ES introduce severe risks of catastrophic physical collisions if executed outside a se-cure simulated sandbox. 

7.2. Future Work 

To address the aforementioned limitations and expand the capabilities of the proposed framework, future research 42 will prioritize several key directions. The immediate pri-ority is the deployment of the synthesized controllers on physical multi-robot systems. While the proposed archi-tecture is designed to mitigate the sim-to-real domain gap by addressing onboard inference latency via the VAE bot-tleneck and actuation uncertainty through high-frequency reactive control, empirical validation on physical hardware remains essential. To overcome the constraints of purely simulation-based optimization, we intend to explore safe reinforcement learning paradigms to enable lightweight, incremental fine-tuning. Developing secure sim-to-real-to-sim pipelines will be crucial to facilitate real-time adaptation without com-promising the physical integrity of the swarm, aligning with recent paradigm shifts in robot learning and evolution (Kuckling, 2023). Furthermore, to further improve training stability, con-tinuous control precision, and sample efficiency, future iterations of the framework will explore hybridizing the current evolutionary approach with modern deep re-inforcement learning algorithms. Recent studies have demonstrated that integrating deterministic policy gradi-ent methods, such as the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradi-ent (DDPG) and Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) algorithms, with baseline stabilizing con-trollers yields exceptional performance and disturbance re-jection in continuous robotic control tasks (Hazem et al., 2025a,b,c). Adapting these hybrid deep RL paradigms to decentralized multi-agent navigation presents a highly promising avenue for scaling the resilience and adaptabil-ity of swarm robotics. 

CRediT author statement Álvaro Díez: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft-ware, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data cu-ration, Writing - Original draft, Writing - Review and editing, Visualization. Fidel Aznar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Resources, Supervi-sion, Project administration. 

Declaration of interests 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted tech-nologies in the writing process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used Google Gemini 2.5 in order to improve the quality and readability of the written text. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the CIAICO/2026/169 project from the Generalitat Valenciana. 

References 

Amato, C., Chowdhary, G., Geramifard, A., Ure, N.K., Kochenderfer, M.J., 2013. Decentralized control of par-tially observable Markov decision processes, in: 2013 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 2398–2405. IEEE, Florence, Italy. https://doi. org/10.1109/CDC.2013.6760239 .Asiain, J., Godoy, J., 2020. Navigation in Large Groups of Robots. Current Robotics Reports 1, 203–213. https: //doi.org/10.1007/s43154-020-00017-2 .Bäck, T., Schwefel, H.P., 1996. Evolutionary computa-tion: an overview, in: 1996 IEEE International Con-ference on Evolutionary Computation (ICEC), pp. 20– 29. IEEE, Nagoya, Japan. https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICEC.1996.542329 .Bank, D., Koenigstein, N., Giryes, R., 2023. Autoen-coders, in: Rokach, L., Maimon, O., Shmueli, E. (Eds.), Machine Learning for Data Science Handbook, pp. 353–374. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-031-24628-9_16 .Batra, S., Huang, Z., Petrenko, A., Kumar, T., Molchanov, A., Sukhatme, G.S., 2021. Decentralized Control of Quadrotor Swarms with End-to-end Deep Reinforcement Learning, in: 2021 5th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), pp. 576–586. PMLR, London, United Kingdom. https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v164/batra22a/batra22a.pdf .Bezerra, L.C.D., dos Santos, A.M.G., Park, S., 2025. Learning Policies for Dynamic Coalition Formation in Multi-Robot Task Allocation. IEEE Robotics and Au-tomation Letters 10, 9216–9223. https://doi.org/10. 1109/LRA.2025.3592080 .Bloom, J., Mukherjee, A., Pinciroli, C., 2022. A Study of Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for Aggregates of Minimalistic Robots. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 10.48550/arXiv.2203.15129 .Boige, R., Flet-Berliac, Y., Flajolet, A., Richard, G., Pierrot, T., 2023. PASTA: Pretrained Action-State Transformer Agents. Preprint at https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2307.10936 .Botev, Z., Kroese, D.P., 2004. Global Likelihood Opti-mization Via the Cross-Entropy Method, with an Ap-plication to Mixture Models, in: 2004 Winter Simula-tion Conference (WSC), pp. 535–541. IEEE, Washing-ton D.C., United States. https://doi.org/10.1109/ WSC.2004.1371358 .43 Brambilla, M., Ferrante, E., Birattari, M., Dorigo, M., 2013. Swarm robotics: a review from the swarm engi-neering perspective. Swarm Intelligence 7, 1–41. https: //doi.org/10.1007/s11721-012-0075-2 .Cheraghi, A.R., Shahzad, S., Graffi, K., 2021. Past, Present, and Future of Swarm Robotics. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2101.00671 .Şahin, E., 2005. Swarm Robotics: From Sources of Inspiration to Domains of Application, in: Şahin, E., Spears, W.M. (Eds.), Swarm Robotics. volume 3342 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pp. 10– 20. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-3-540-30552-1_2 .Dahouda, M.K., Joe, I., 2021. A Deep-Learned Embedding Technique for Categorical Features Encoding. IEEE Access 9, 114381–114391. https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2021.3104357 .Dufourq, E., Bassett, B.A., 2017. Automated Problem Identification: Regression vs Classification via Evolu-tionary Deep Networks. Preprint at https://doi.org/ 10.48550/arXiv.1707.00703 .Fan, D.D., Theodorou, E.A., Reeder, J., 2018. Model-Based Stochastic Search for Large Scale Optimization of Multi-Agent UAV Swarms, in: 2018 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 2216– 2222. IEEE, Bangalore, India. https://doi.org/10. 1109/SSCI.2018.8628677 .Feuerriegel, S., Hartmann, J., Janiesch, C., Zschech, P., 2023. Generative AI. Business & Information Systems Engineering 66, 111–126. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s12599-023-00834-7 .Francesca, G., Brambilla, M., Brutschy, A., Trianni, V., Birattari, M., 2014. AutoMoDe: A novel approach to the automatic design of control software for robot swarms. Swarm Intelligence 8, 89–112. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11721-014-0092-4 .Glasmachers, T., Schaul, T., Sun, Y., Wierstra, D., Schmidhuber, J., 2010. Exponential natural evolution strategies, in: 2010 12th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation (GECCO), pp. 393–400. ACM, Portland, United States. https://doi.org/10. 1145/1830483.1830557 .Gupta, J.K., Egorov, M., Kochenderfer, M., 2017. Coop-erative Multi-agent Control Using Deep Reinforcement Learning, in: Sukthankar, G., Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.A. (Eds.), Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems. volume 10642 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pp. 66–83. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-319-71682-4_5 .Güzel, M.S., 2013. Autonomous Vehicle Navigation Using Vision and Mapless Strategies: A Survey. Advances in Mechanical Engineering 5, 234747. https://doi.org/ 10.1155/2013/234747 .Ha, D., 2017. Evolving Stable Strategies. Blog.otoro.net. https://blog.otoro.net/2017/ 11/12/evolving-stable-strategies/ (accessed 12 October 2025). Ha, D., Schmidhuber, J., 2018. World models. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1803.10122 .Ha, D., Tang, Y., 2022. Collective intelligence for deep learning: A survey of recent developments. Collective Intelligence 1, 26339137221114874. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/26339137221114874 .Hansen, N., Ostermeier, A., 2001. Completely Derandom-ized Self-Adaptation in Evolution Strategies. Evolution-ary Computation 9, 159–195. https://doi.org/10. 1162/106365601750190398 .Hasselmann, K., Ligot, A., Ruddick, J., Birattari, M., 2021. Empirical assessment and comparison of neuro-evolutionary methods for the automatic off-line design of robot swarms. Nature Communications 12, 4345. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24642-3 .Hausler, A.J., Saccon, A., Aguiar, A.P., Hauser, J., Pas-coal, A.M., 2016. Energy-Optimal Motion Planning for Multiple Robotic Vehicles With Collision Avoid-ance. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Tech-nology 24, 867–883. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST. 2015.2475399 .Hazem, Z.B., Guler, N., Altaif, A.H., 2025a. Model-free trajectory tracking control of a 5-DOF Mitsubishi robotic arm using deep deterministic policy gradient al-gorithm. Discover Robotics 1, 4. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s44430-025-00004-2 .Hazem, Z.B., Saidi, F., Guler, N., Altaif, A.H., 2025b. A Hybrid Reinforcement Learning Framework Combining TD3 and PID Control for Robust Trajectory Tracking of a 5-DOF Robotic Arm. Automation 6, 56. https: //doi.org/10.3390/automation6040056 .Hazem, Z.B., Saidi, F., Guler, N., Altaif, A.H., 2025c. Re-inforcement learning-based intelligent trajectory track-ing for a 5-DOF Mitsubishi robotic arm: compara-tive evaluation of DDPG, LC-DDPG, and TD3-ADX. International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Ap-plications 9, 1982–2002. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s41315-025-00475-x .Hiraga, M., 2026. Topology and weight neuroevolution for social learning in robotic swarms. Artificial Life and Robotics 31, 202–212. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10015-025-01078-2 .44 Hüttenrauch, M., Šošić, A., Neumann, G., 2019. Deep Reinforcement Learning for Swarm Systems. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20, 1–31. https://www. jmlr.org/papers/volume20/18-476/18-476.pdf .Kaelbling, L.P., Littman, M.L., Moore, A.W., 1996. Re-inforcement Learning: A Survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 4, 237–285. https://doi.org/ 10.1613/jair.301 .Kingma, D.P., Welling, M., 2013. Auto-Encoding Varia-tional Bayes. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.1312.6114 .Kolar, P., Benavidez, P., Jamshidi, M., 2020. Survey of Datafusion Techniques for Laser and Vision Based Sen-sor Integration for Autonomous Navigation. Sensors 20, 2180. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20082180 .Kuckling, J., 2023. Recent trends in robot learning and evolution for swarm robotics. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 10, 1134841. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt. 2023.1134841 .Lawson, D., Qureshi, A.H., 2023. Control Transformer: Robot Navigation in Unknown Environments Through PRM-Guided Return-Conditioned Sequence Modeling, in: 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In-telligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 9324–9331. IEEE, Detroit, United States. https://doi.org/10. 1109/IROS55552.2023.10341628 .LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learn-ing. Nature 521, 436–444. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature14539 .Liu, H., Long, X., Li, Y., Yan, J., Li, M., Chen, C., Gu, F., Pu, H., Luo, J., 2025a. Adaptive multi-UAV cooperative path planning based on novel rotation artificial potential fields. Knowledge-Based Systems 317, 113429. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2025.113429 .Liu, X., Wen, S., Guo, Z., Liu, H., 2026. Trans-fer learning-based sparse-reward meta-Q-learning algo-rithm for active SLAM. Expert Systems with Applica-tions 299, 129799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa. 2025.129799 .Liu, X., Wen, S., Liu, H., Yu, F.R., 2025b. CPL-SLAM: Centralized Collaborative Multirobot Visual-Inertial SLAM Using Point-and-Line Features. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 12, 21866–21875. https: //doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2025.3548958 .Meng, L., Wen, M., Le, C., Li, X., Xing, D., Zhang, W., Wen, Y., Zhang, H., Wang, J., Yang, Y., Xu, B., 2023. Offline Pre-trained Multi-agent Decision Transformer. Machine Intelligence Research 20, 233–248. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s11633-022-1383-7 .Moradi, R., Berangi, R., Minaei, B., 2019. A survey of regularization strategies for deep models. Artificial In-telligence Review 53, 3947–3986. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10462-019-09784-7 .Mukhlish, F., Page, J., Bain, M., 2018. Evolutionary-learning framework: improving automatic swarm robotics design. International Journal of Intelligent Un-manned Systems 6, 197–215. https://doi.org/10. 1108/IJIUS-06-2018-0016 .Muratore, F., Ramos, F., Turk, G., Yu, W., Gienger, M., Peters, J., 2022. Robot Learning From Randomized Simulations: A Review. Frontiers in Robotics and AI 9, 799893. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2022. 799893 .Nanda, A., Mohapatra, D.B.B., Mahapatra, A.P.K., Ma-hapatra, A.P.K., Mahapatra, A.P.K., 2021. Multiple comparison test by Tukey’s honestly significant differ-ence (HSD): Do the confident level control type I error. International Journal of Statistics and Applied Mathe-matics 6, 59–65. https://doi.org/10.22271/maths. 2021.v6.i1a.636 .Nguyen, H.T., Tran, K., Luong, N.H., 2021. Enhanc-ing Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradi-ent with Cross-Entropy Method, in: 2021 8th NAFOS-TED Conference on Information and Computer Science (NICS), pp. 132–137. IEEE, Hanoi, Vietnam. https: //doi.org/10.1109/NICS54270.2021.9701549 .Pierson, H.A., Gashler, M.S., 2017. Deep learning in robotics: a review of recent research. Advanced Robotics 31, 821–835. https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864. 2017.1365009 .Rubinstein, R., 1999. The Cross-Entropy Method for Combinatorial and Continuous Optimization. Method-ology And Computing In Applied Probability 1, 127– 190. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010091220143 .Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I., 2017. Evolution Strategies as a Scalable Alterna-tive to Reinforcement Learning. Preprint at https: //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1703.03864 .Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., Moritz, P., 2015. Trust Region Policy Optimization, in: 2015 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1889–1897. PMLR, Lille, France. http: //proceedings.mlr.press/v37/schulman15.pdf .Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal Policy Optimization Al-gorithms. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.1707.06347 .Shaikh, D., Rañó, I., 2020. Braitenberg Vehicles as Com-putational Tools for Research in Neuroscience. Fron-tiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8, 565963. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.565963 .45 Shanthamallu, U.S., Spanias, A., Tepedelenlioglu, C., Stanley, M., 2017. A brief survey of machine learn-ing methods and their sensor and IoT applications, in: 2017 8th International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems & Applications (IISA), pp. 1–8. IEEE, Larnaca, Cyprus. https://doi.org/10.1109/ IISA.2017.8316459 .Stanley, K.O., Miikkulainen, R., 2002. Evolving Neural Networks through Augmenting Topologies. Evolution-ary Computation 10, 99–127. https://doi.org/10. 1162/106365602320169811 .Stefek, A., Pham, T.V., Krivanek, V., Pham, K.L., 2020. Energy Comparison of Controllers Used for a Differ-ential Drive Wheeled Mobile Robot. IEEE Access 8, 170915–170927. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS. 2020.3023345 .Wawrzyński, P., 2009. A Cat-Like Robot Real-Time Learning to Run, in: Kolehmainen, M., Toiva-nen, P., Beliczynski, B. (Eds.), Adaptive and Nat-ural Computing Algorithms. volume 5495 of Lec-ture Notes in Computer Science , pp. 380–390. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-3-642-04921-7_39 .Wierstra, D., Schaul, T., Glasmachers, T., Sun, Y., Pe-ters, J., Schmidhuber, J., 2014. Natural Evolution Strategies. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15, 949–980. https://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume15/ wierstra14a/wierstra14a.pdf .Xiao, X., Liu, B., Warnell, G., Stone, P., 2022. Mo-tion planning and control for mobile robot naviga-tion using machine learning: a survey. Autonomous Robots 46, 569–597. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10514-022-10039-8 .Ye, X., Pan, Z., Gao, X., Wu, K., Ren, B., 2023. Differen-tiable Learning of Scalable Multi-Agent Navigation Poli-cies. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 2229– 2236. https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2023.3248440 .Yogesh, Dubey, A.K., Arora, R., Yadav, S., 2017. Areview and comprehensive comparison of image de-noising techniques, in: 2017 6th International Confer-ence on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimiza-tion (Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO), pp. 624– 629. IEEE, Noida, India. https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICRITO.2017.8342503 .Yu, T., Yasuda, T., Ohkura, K., Matsumura, Y., Goka, M., 2015. Robust Swarm Robotics System using CMA-Neuroes with Incremental Evolution. International Journal of Engineering Research &Technology 4. https://www.ijert.org/research/ robust-swarm-robotics-system-using-cmaneuroes-with-incremental-evolution-IJERTV4IS110303. pdf .46