Title: Federated Multi-Modal Human Activity Recognition using Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.33492v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 02:05:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# FEDERATED MULTI -M ODAL HUMAN ACTIVITY RECOGNITION USING MULTI -A GENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

Debasmita Dey 

SQC & OR Unit Indian Statistical Institute Kolkata Kolkata, India 

debasmita.dey9_r@isical.ac.in 

Tanmay Sen 

SQC & OR Unit Indian Statistical Institute Kolkata Kolkata, India 

> ∗

tanmay.sen@isical.ac.in 

Himel Mallick 

Department of Population Health Sciences Cornell University 425 E 61st Street New York, 

him4004@med.cornell.edu 

September 29, 2026 

## ABSTRACT 

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) from heterogeneous wearable sensors has become a fundamental component of the Internet of Health Things (IoHT), enabling continuous monitoring for rehabilitation, elderly care, and smart healthcare applications. Yet most existing multimodal fusion methods assign fixed equal weights to all sensor streams, overlooking the fact that different modalities carry different information depending on the subject and activity, and that some sensors are far more expensive to acquire than others. The quality of each sensor changes over time because of movement, incorrect placement, or temporary blockage. Therefore, assigning fixed importance to all sensor modalities is often ineffective in real world applications. In this paper, we first propose an adaptive and cost aware multimodal HAR framework based on multi-agent reinforcement learning for the centralized setting. We then extend this framework to federated learning, resulting in the proposed FedMHAR framework. In the centralized setting, we model multimodal fusion as a cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) problem, where each sensing modality is assigned a PPO based agent that learns a per sample fusion weight for its corresponding sensor, enabling the model to dynamically emphasize informative modalities while down weighting costly sensors whenever cheaper alternatives provide sufficient information. In the federated setting, we introduce BiFL-PPO, a novel bidirectional federated optimization strategy in which a server side PPO policy learns client specific trust weights that are fed back to clients to adaptively adjust local learning rates and proximal regularization. Unlike conventional round level optimization, BiFL-PPO uses dense batch level rewards to provide more frequent feedback, leading to more stable training under heterogeneous client data. We evaluate the proposed framework on the MEx Rehabilitation and UTD Multimodal Human Action datasets. In the centralized setting, the proposed MARL based framework achieves classification accuracies of 87.30% and 94.98%, outperforming both conventional multimodal fusion methods and state-of-the-art HAR models. In the federated setting, FedMHAR achieves 79.74% and 77.49% accuracy, consistently surpassing strong federated baselines, including FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN, FedNova, and AdaFedProx. Across both datasets, the proposed bidirectional PPO strategy yields more stable performance than standard federated optimization while reducing sensor acquisition cost. 

> ∗

Corresponding author: tanmay.sen@isical.ac.in arXiv:2609.33492v1 [cs.AI] 27 Sep 2026 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

## 1 Introduction 

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] has emerged as an important research area in computer vision, wearable computing, and smart healthcare due to its broad range of applications, including rehabilitation monitoring, elderly care, patient surveillance, and assisted living. Recent advances in wearable devices, ambient sensing technologies, and edge computing have enabled continuous monitoring of human activities through rich streams of sensor data, making HAR an essential component of intelligent healthcare and smart environments. Accurate recognition of human activities not only improves personalized healthcare services but also enables timely intervention in safety critical situations. To improve recognition performance, modern HAR systems increasingly exploit multiple sensing modalities, including accelerometers, gyroscopes, pressure sensors, depth cameras, skeletal joints, and electromyography (EMG) signals [6, 7, 8]. These heterogeneous modalities capture complementary characteristics of human motion and environmental interactions that cannot be adequately represented by a single sensor. Consequently, multimodal learning has consistently demonstrated superior recognition accuracy and robustness compared with unimodal approaches, particularly for complex activities involving subtle body movements or occlusions. Most existing multimodal HAR [9] methods rely on static fusion mechanisms that assume all modalities contribute equally or learn fixed fusion policies during training. Early fusion approaches concatenate features extracted from individual modalities before classification, whereas late fusion methods combine predictions from independently trained models. More recent approaches employ graph neural networks to model inter sensor relationships or attention mechanisms to learn feature importance automatically [10, 1]. Although these methods have achieved impressive recognition accuracy, they exhibit two important limitations. First, the learned fusion strategy remains fixed after training and cannot adapt to changes in sensor reliability during inference. Second, virtually all sensing modalities remain active throughout the inference process, regardless of whether they provide useful information for a particular activity instance, resulting in unnecessary sensing, computation, and energy expenditure. Reinforcement Learning (RL) [11] offers a natural solution to these challenges by formulating multimodal fusion as a sequential decision making problem. Rather than learning fixed fusion weights from labeled data, an RL agent continuously interacts with the environment and learns adaptive policies that maximize long term reward. Such a reward can simultaneously encourage high recognition accuracy while penalizing the use of expensive sensing modalities. Consequently, RL enables dynamic, per-sample sensor selection and adaptive fusion according to the current sensing conditions, allowing the recognition model to emphasize informative modalities while suppressing unreliable or unnecessarily costly sensors. This capability makes RL particularly attractive for real world HAR systems operating under dynamic environments and resource constraints. Motivated by these observations, we propose a cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning framework for adaptive multimodal fusion. Specifically, each sensing modality is associated with an independent Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) agent that learns a per-sample fusion weight reflecting the usefulness of its corresponding sensor. The learned fusion weights are employed by a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [12] architecture consisting of modality specific expert networks, allowing the model to dynamically combine multimodal representations according to the current activity instance. By explicitly incorporating normalized sensor acquisition cost into the reinforcement learning reward, the proposed framework performs implicit sensor scheduling, automatically down weighting expensive modalities whenever lower-cost sensors provide sufficient discriminative information. Unlike conventional graph- or attention-based fusion methods, the proposed policy adapts continuously during inference, making it substantially more robust to changing sensing conditions. Although centralized training has demonstrated remarkable success for HAR, collecting wearable sensor data in a centralized repository raises significant privacy and security concerns, particularly in healthcare applications where activity records often contain highly sensitive personal information. Federated Learning (FL) addresses this challenge by enabling multiple devices or institutions to collaboratively train a shared model without exchanging raw data [13, 14]. However, wearable HAR datasets are inherently heterogeneous because activity patterns, sensor quality, and user behaviour vary considerably across clients. Conventional federated optimization algorithms such as FedAvg often struggle under such non-IID data distributions, leading to unstable convergence and degraded recognition performance. To address these limitations, we extend the proposed centralized framework to the federated setting through FedMHAR , a privacy-preserving multimodal HAR framework. At its core, FedMHAR introduces BiFL-PPO, a bidirectional federated optimization strategy in which a server-side PPO policy learns client specific trust weights based on observed training behaviour. These trust weights are communicated back to participating clients to adaptively adjust local learning rates and proximal regularization during training, allowing the optimization process to account for heterogeneous client characteristics. Unlike conventional round level optimization, BiFL-PPO employs dense batch level rewards that provide more informative feedback during policy learning, leading to more stable optimization under heterogeneous data distributions while preserving user privacy. 2A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: • We propose a cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MAPPO) framework for adaptive multimodal fusion in HAR, where each sensing modality is controlled by an independent agent that learns per-sample fusion weights according to the reliability and informativeness of its sensor. • We introduce a cost aware reward formulation that explicitly incorporates sensor acquisition cost, enabling implicit sensor scheduling and adaptive modality selection without requiring supervision on sensor quality. • We develop a reinforcement learning guided Mixture-of-Experts architecture that combines modality specific expert networks using dynamically learned fusion weights, allowing the model to adapt to changing sensing conditions. • We extend the proposed approach to federated learning through FedMHAR with BiFL-PPO, a bidirectional PPO based optimization strategy that learns client specific trust weights and uses dense batch level rewards to improve training under heterogeneous client data. • Extensive experiments on the MEx Rehabilitation and UTD Multimodal Human Action datasets demonstrate that the proposed framework consistently outperforms state-of-the-art centralized and federated HAR methods while maintaining stable performance and accounting for sensor acquisition cost. 

## 2 Related Work 

This section reviews the literature on Human Activity Recognition (HAR), Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), Federated Learning (FL), and Mixture of Experts (MoE). 

2.1 Human Activity Recognition 

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) has gained significant attention due to its applications in healthcare, smart homes, surveillance, rehabilitation, and fitness monitoring [15]. Early HAR systems relied on traditional machine learning techniques with handcrafted features, which often struggled with complex temporal patterns and real-world variability [16]. Recent advancements in deep learning, particularly CNNs, LSTMs, RNNs, Transformers, and hybrid architectures, have significantly improved activity recognition accuracy by automatically learning spatial and temporal features from raw sensor data collected through smartphones, wearables, and IoT devices [17]. Recent studies also emphasize multimodal sensor fusion, attention mechanisms, federated learning, and edge computing to enhance robustness, privacy, and real-time performance. In this direction, Islam et al. [18] combine CNN and ConvLSTM features through a self-attention mechanism for multimodal HAR, demonstrating that fusing visual and time-series sensor data yields more robust activity recognition than single-modality approaches. Building on this, Wang et al. [19] propose M2HAR-Net, fusing Wi-Fi CSI signals with smartwatch inertial data through parallel CNN-Transformer encoders, showing that combining wireless sensing with wearable sensors captures complementary motion characteristics across heterogeneous modalities. However, challenges such as sensor noise, data imbalance, computational overhead, and poor cross-domain generalization [20] still remain active research issues. 

2.2 Deep Reinforcement Learning in Human Activity Recognition 

Deep reinforcement learning has been applied to human activity recognition across several distinct problem formulations [21]. Tang et al. [22] introduced a deep progressive reinforcement learning (DPRL) framework in which an agent sequentially identifies the most informative frames from a skeleton-based video sequence. Wu et al. [23] formulated the frame selection problem as a set of multiple Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), with each agent assigned the task of selecting a specific frame. In [24], an attention-aware sampling approach was proposed to preserve only the most informative activity frames and discard irrelevant video frames. In [25], a Feature Selection Network (FSN) based on the Actor-Critic RL framework was proposed to select discriminative frames from skeleton sequences. The frame representations are obtained through a Generalized Graph Convolutional Network (GGCN). While prior DRL-based HAR methods focus on single-modality frame selection using a single agent with no cost awareness or federated capability, our MAPPO-MoE assigns cooperative multi-agent policies across heterogeneous wearable sensor streams with explicit sensor cost penalisation, per-sample dynamic fusion, and a federated extension under non-IID data partitioning. 

2.3 Federated Learning 

Federated learning was introduced by McMahan et al. [13], who proposed FedAvg, where clients perform local SGD and the server aggregates updates through weighted averaging. Although effective, FedAvg struggles under statistical 3A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 and systems heterogeneity. To address client drift, Li et al. [26] proposed FedProx, which adds a proximal regularization term to the local objective, improving convergence under non-IID data. Wang et al. [27] introduced FedNova, which normalizes client updates to eliminate aggregation bias caused by varying local update counts. Li et al. [28] proposed FedBN, which keeps batch-normalization layers local to mitigate feature-distribution shift across clients. More recently, Sahoo et al. [29] introduced AdaFedProx, where a server-side DQN adaptively learns the proximal coefficient based on client states, improving performance over FedAvg, FedProx, FedNova, and FedBN under heterogeneous settings. Unlike these approaches, our method learns aggregation weights directly using a Server-PPO agent. At each communi-cation round, the agent observes per-client validation signals and generates adaptive aggregation weights through a Beta policy, optimizing global model performance instead of relying on fixed aggregation rules or manually designed regularization. 

2.4 Mixture of Experts (MoE) 

Recent advances have demonstrated the effectiveness of MoE architectures across a wide range of domains by enabling dynamic expert specialization and efficient computation. The authors in [30] integrated MoE-based large language model, where a router dynamically activates the top-k experts to process multimodal vision-language tokens, improving reasoning. Similarly, for dynamically routing visual features to domain-specialized experts, the authors in [31] have instilled MoE. MoE also found its use case in solving heterogeneity problems in PDE datasets [32]. For vision language action models in end-to-end autonomous driving [33], MoE has played a vital role in perception, reasoning, and action generation. Using LoRA ranks as an expert of the MoE has helped in solving multi-task model merging, reducing parameter interference. Building on these ideas, our work also adopts the MoE paradigm for multimodal fusion, augmented with a Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) agent that learns modality-expert weighting as a sequential decision-making problem. This design enables dynamic, sample-level fusion rather than static concatenation, allowing the model to lean more heavily on whichever modality is most informative for a given instance, while an accuracy- and cost-aware reward further encourages the policy to favor cheaper or more readily available sensors over costlier ones when they are sufficient for correct classification. 

## 3 Background Concepts 

3.1 Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization 

Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO) is a policy gradient algorithm designed for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). It extends the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [34] algorithm to multi-agent settings while following the Centralized Training and Decentralized Execution (CTDE) paradigm [35]. During training, agents utilize global state information through a centralized critic to stabilize learning, whereas during execution each agent independently selects actions using only its local observations. Consider a cooperative game defined by the tuple G =  S, {O i}Ni=1 , {A i}Ni=1 , P, R, γ  , where S denotes the global state space, Oi and Ai represent the observation and action spaces of agent i, respectively, P (s′|s, a) is the state transition probability, R(s, a) is the shared team reward function, γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor, and N is the total number of agents. At each time step t, the environment is in state st. Agent i receives a local observation oti ∈ O i and samples an action according to its stochastic policy ti ∼ πθ (ati|oti), where πθ denotes the policy network parameterized by θ. Although each agent acts independently using its own observation, MAPPO commonly employs parameter sharing, where all agents use the same policy network while conditioning on different observations. The environment then transitions to the next state according to st+1 ∼ P (st+1 |st, at), where at = ( at

> 1

, a t

> 2

, . . . , a tN ) represents the joint action of all agents. Since the environment is cooperative, all agents receive the same team reward rt. The objective of MAPPO is to maximize the expected cumulative discounted team reward 

J(θ) = Eτ ∼πθ

" TX

> t=0

γtrt

#

, (1) where τ denotes a trajectory generated by the joint policy and T is the episode horizon. 

Centralized Critic: During training, MAPPO employs a centralized value function that utilizes the global state to estimate the expected return Vϕ(st), where ϕ denotes the critic parameters. The centralized critic has access to complete state information only during training, while the actor uses only local observations during execution, thereby satisfying the CTDE paradigm. 4A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Generalized Advantage Estimation: To reduce the variance of policy gradient estimates while maintaining low bias, MAPPO computes the advantage function using Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) 

At = 

> T−t−1

X

> l=0

(γλ )lδt+l, (2) where λ ∈ [0 , 1] is the GAE smoothing parameter and 

δt = rt + γV ϕ(st+1 ) − Vϕ(st)

is the temporal-difference (TD) error. The estimated return is subsequently computed as 

Rt = At + Vϕ(st).

Policy Optimization: The actor network is updated using the PPO clipped surrogate objective. The probability ratio between the updated policy and the previous policy is defined by [34] 

rt(θ) = πθ (ati|oti)

πθold (ati|oti) .

The clipped objective is 

LCLIP (θ) = E [min ( rt(θ)At, clip ( rt(θ), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) At)] ,

where ϵ is the clipping parameter controlling the maximum policy update. The clipping operation prevents excessively large policy updates, thereby improving training stability. 

Value Function Loss: The critic is optimized by minimizing the squared error between the predicted value and the estimated return 

LV (ϕ) = E

h

(Vϕ(st) − Rt)2i

.

Entropy Regularization: To encourage exploration and avoid premature convergence, MAPPO incorporates an entropy regularization term Lent = E [H(πθ (·| oi))] , where H(·) denotes the Shannon entropy of the policy distribution. Finally, the MAPPO optimization objective is 

LMAPPO = LCLIP − c1LV + c2Lent ,

where c1 and c2 are weighting coefficients that balance policy optimization, value estimation, and exploration. This objective enables stable policy learning while effectively coordinating multiple agents in cooperative environments. To improve specialization across diverse input patterns, Mixture of Experts (MoE) [36] architectures have recently gained significant attention. Instead of learning a single shared representation, MoE enables multiple expert networks to specialize in different regions of the input space while a gating network dynamically determines their contributions. Therefore, the basic formulation of MoE is briefly described next. 

3.2 Mixture of Experts 

Mixture of Experts (MoE) [36] is a neural network architecture that improves learning efficiency and model expres-siveness by decomposing a complex learning task into multiple specialized expert networks. Rather than relying on a single network to capture all data characteristics, MoE employs several experts, each of which learns complementary representations of the input. A gating network then adaptively combines the outputs of these experts based on the input sample. Consider an input feature vector x ∈ Rd. An MoE model consists of a set of N expert networks, E =

{E1, E 2, . . . , E N }, where each expert independently processes the input and produces an output yi = Ei(x), i =1, . . . , N. To determine the contribution of each expert, a gating network G(·) computes a score vector z = G(x),5A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 where z = [ z1, z 2, . . . , z N ] contains the unnormalized gating scores. These scores are converted into normalized gating weights using the softmax function, gi(x) = exp( zi)   

> PNj=1 exp( zj)

, where PNi=1 gi(x) = 1 , gi(x) ≥ 0. The final MoE output is obtained as the weighted combination of all expert predictions, y = PNi=1 gi(x) Ei(x) = PNi=1 gi(x) yi.

The adaptive weighting mechanism enables different experts to specialize in distinct input characteristics while allowing the gating network to dynamically select the most relevant experts for each input sample. Consequently, MoE improves the representational capacity and flexibility of deep neural networks without requiring all experts to contribute equally to every prediction. 

3.3 Federated Learning 

Federated Learning (FL) [13] is a distributed machine learning approach where multiple clients collaboratively train a global model without sharing their raw data, thereby preserving privacy. Suppose there are K clients, each having a local dataset Dk with nk samples. The global objective function is defined as: 

F (w) = 

> K

X

> k=1

nk

N Fk(w) (3) where N = PKk=1 nk, w represents the global model parameters, and Fk(w) is the local loss function of client k. At communication round t, the server broadcasts the current global model wt to all participating clients. Each client performs local optimization on its own dataset, 

wt+1  

> k

= wt − η∇Fk(wt), (4) where η is the learning rate. After local training, only the updated model parameters are transmitted to the server. The server then aggregates the received models to obtain an updated global model, which is subsequently broadcast to all clients for the next communication round. This iterative optimization process enables collaborative learning while ensuring that the raw training data remain local to each client. Although the general federated learning framework remains unchanged, several aggregation algorithms have been developed to address challenges such as statistical heterogeneity, client drift, and feature distribution mismatch. Since these algorithms serve as baseline methods for evaluating the proposed framework, their fundamental principles are briefly described in the following subsection. 

3.4 Federated Aggregation Algorithms FedAvg: FedAvg [13] performs local training by allowing each client to optimize its model parameters using standard stochastic gradient descent on local data for multiple epochs. Let wt denote the global model at communication round t,and wk denote the locally updated model of client k. The vanilla FedAvg server aggregates client updates using data-size proportional averaging, wt+1 = PKk=1  

> nk
> n

wk, where nk is the number of samples held by client k and n = PKk=1 nk.

FedProx: FedProx [26] performs local optimization by minimizing the objective min wk Fk(wk) + μ 

> 2

∥wk − wt∥2,

where Fk(wk) is the local loss, wt is the current global model, and μ is the proximal coefficient that limits client drift under heterogeneous data distributions. After local training, the vanilla FedProx server updates the global model using weighted averaging, wt+1 = PKk=1  

> nk
> n

wk.

Fednova: FedNova [27] mitigates the objective inconsistency caused by heterogeneous local training by normalizing each client’s accumulated model update before aggregation. Specifically, the server updates the global model as 

wt+1 = wt − τeff 

PKk=1 pkdk, where wt and wt+1 denote the global model parameters before and after communication round t, K is the total number of clients, pk = nk/n is the data-size weight of client k with nk local samples out of 

n total samples, dk = ∆ k/τ k is the normalized local update, ∆k = wk − wt is the accumulated model update after local training, τk is the number of local optimization steps performed by client k, and τeff = PKk=1 pkτk is the effective weighted average of local updates. 

FedBN: FedBN [28] mitigates feature heterogeneity by keeping Batch Normalization (BN) parameters local while aggregating only the non-BN parameters. Let the model be represented as (w = ( wN B , w BN )) , where (wN B ) and 6A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

(wBN ) denote the non-BN and BN parameters, respectively. Vanilla FedBN aggregates the non-BN parameters as 

wN B t+1 = PKk=1 pk, w N B k , where (K) is the number of clients, (wN B k ) is the locally trained non-BN model of client (k),and (pk = nk/n ) is the data-size weight. 

AdaFedProx: AdaFedProx [29] extends FedProx by performing local optimization with a proximal regularization term, wt+1  

> k

= arg min w

Fk(w) + μ 

> 2

∥w − wt∥2 , where Fk(w) denotes the local objective of client k, wt is the global model at communication round t, μ is the proximal regularization coefficient, and wt+1  

> k

is the updated local model. AdaFedProx aggregates the client models using fixed or uniform averaging, wt+1 = PKk=1 pkwt+1  

> k

, where pk denotes the aggregation weight of client k.

## 4 Proposed Methodology 

This section presents the proposed framework, which consists of two complementary components: (i) an adaptive and cost aware multimodal human activity recognition framework for the centralized setting, and (ii) its extension to privacy-preserving federated learning through the proposed BiFL-PPO optimization strategy. In the centralized setting, the proposed framework formulates multimodal fusion as a cooperative multi-agent reinforce-ment learning problem. Each sensing modality is associated with a dedicated expert classifier and a MAPPO agent, which jointly learn adaptive modality specific trust weights for dynamic prediction fusion. To enable privacy-preserving collaborative learning, the framework is further extended to the federated setting through the proposed BiFL-PPO 

strategy. A server side PPO agent learns adaptive client trust weights that are used for both model aggregation and feedback guided local optimization, establishing a bidirectional interaction between the server and participating clients. The detailed formulation of both centralized and federated frameworks is presented in the following subsections. The architectures of the proposed centralized and federated frameworks are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. The following subsections describe the individual components and their corresponding formulations in detail. 

4.1 Centralised Architecture 

The proposed architecture is a multimodal, multi-stage framework that integrates deep learning based feature extraction with MARL for adaptive sensor fusion. It is designed to process heterogeneous sensor data and produce accurate activity classification by dynamically adjusting the contribution of each modality. 

Stage 1. Modality Specific Feature Extraction: As illustrated in Fig. 1, each sensing modality is processed independently using a dedicated one-dimensional convolutional neural network (1D CNN) encoder. Let xc ∈ RTc×dc

denote the input sequence corresponding to the c-th sensing modality, where Tc is the sequence length and dc is the input feature dimension. The encoder fc(·) transforms the raw sensor signal into a latent feature representation, 

ec = fc(xc), ec ∈ Rde , (5) where de denotes the embedding dimension. For all experiments reported in this paper, we set de = 128 . Since each encoder is trained exclusively on its corresponding sensing modality, it learns modality-specific temporal characteristics while preserving discriminative information for subsequent activity classification. The extracted embeddings serve as the input to the corresponding expert networks in the subsequent stage, where modality-specific predictions are generated prior to adaptive multimodal fusion. 

Stage 2. Expert Level Classification: The modality-specific embeddings extracted in Stage 1 are subsequently processed by independent expert networks. Each expert is implemented as a multilayer perceptron (MLP) and is responsible for learning discriminative decision boundaries for its corresponding sensing modality. Given the embedding 

ec, the c-th expert produces a modality-specific logit vector 

yc = gc(ec), c = 1 , . . . , C, (6) where gc(·) denotes the expert classifier corresponding to modality c, and yc ∈ RC is the predicted logit vector over the 

C activity classes. During the pretraining stage, the expert networks are jointly optimized using cross-entropy loss under equal-weight fusion. Specifically, the initial fused prediction is obtained by uniformly averaging the expert logits, 7A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Figure 1: Overview of the centralized MAPPO-MoE architecture. Each modality’s embedding, extracted by a shared multimodal encoder, is concatenated into a joint state s observed by every modality’s MAPPO agent; each agent outputs a trust weight wm for its own modality’s expert via a Beta policy, and these weights are combined via softmax to fuse the experts’ logits into the final prediction. A shared critic V (s) estimates the value of the state, and a reward based on the classification-accuracy gain over an equal-weight baseline, penalized by sensor cost, is used to periodically update the agents and critic via a clipped-surrogate PPO objective. 8A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

ˆzeq = 1

C

> C

X

> c=1

zc, (7) where ˆzeq denotes the equal-weight fused logits. After applying the softmax function, the resulting probability of the ground-truth class, denoted by ˆpeq  

> y

, serves as the reference confidence used in the reward formulation described in Stage 3. 

Stage 3. Adaptive Weight Generation using MAPPO: Instead of assigning equal importance to all sensing modalities, the proposed framework formulates multimodal fusion as a cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning problem. Each sensing modality is associated with an independent MAPPO agent that learns a sample-specific fusion weight based on the global multimodal representation. At each training step, the shared state is constructed by concatenating the embeddings generated by all modality-specific encoders, s = [ e1 ∥ e2 ∥ · · · ∥ eN ] ,

where en denotes the embedding extracted by the n-th encoder in Stage 1 and ∥ represents vector concatenation. During centralized training, every MAPPO agent observes the complete state s, enabling cooperation among modalities. Given the shared state, the policy network of agent c generates a continuous action corresponding to the importance of its associated sensing modality, ac ∼ πθc (ac | s),

where πθc denotes the stochastic policy parameterized by θc. The actions generated by all agents are normalized using the softmax function to obtain the final fusion weights, ˜wc = exp( ac)   

> PCj=1 exp( aj)

, PCc=1 ˜wc = 1 .

The adaptive multimodal prediction is then obtained by weighting the modality-specific expert logits, ˆz = PCc=1 ˜wczc,

where zc = gc(ec) denotes the logit vector produced by the c-th expert. Finally, the fused logits are converted into class probabilities using the softmax function for activity prediction. During training, a centralized critic estimates the state-value function Vϕ(s) and evaluates the quality of the joint policy. The critic is optimized using the PPO objective described in Section 3, while the actor networks are updated to maximize the expected cumulative reward based on the quality of the fused prediction. 

Reward Function: The objective of the MAPPO agents is to learn modality specific fusion weights that maximize classification performance while minimizing the reliance on expensive sensing modalities. To achieve this objective, we design a dense reward function that jointly considers prediction improvement and sensor acquisition cost: 

Rt =  ˆpMAPPO  

> y

− ˆpeq 

> y

| {z }

> Accuracy Gain

−λ

PCc=1 ˜wcκc

PCc=1 κc

| {z }

> Normalized Sensor Cost

,

where ˆpMAPPO  

> y

denotes the softmax probability assigned to the ground-truth class y using the adaptive MAPPO-generated fusion weights, while ˆpeq  

> y

is the corresponding probability obtained under the equal-weight fusion strategy introduced in Stage 2. The first term therefore measures the improvement in prediction confidence achieved by adaptive multimodal fusion. A positive value indicates that the learned policy outperforms equal-weight fusion, whereas a negative value penalizes inferior decisions. Since this reward is computed for every training sample, it provides a dense learning signal and alleviates the sparse reward problem commonly encountered in reinforcement learning. The second term introduces a cost-aware regularization based on the acquisition cost of each sensing modality. Here, 

κc denotes the normalized acquisition cost of modality c, and ˜wc is the fusion weight assigned by the MAPPO agent. Consequently, modalities with higher acquisition costs receive a larger penalty when assigned larger fusion weights. The denominator normalizes the total acquisition cost, restricting the cost penalty to the interval [0 , 1] . The trade-off parameter λ ≥ 0 controls the balance between recognition accuracy and sensing cost, with larger values encouraging the policy to rely more heavily on lower-cost modalities whenever comparable predictive performance can be achieved. 

4.2 Proposed Federated Learning 

The BiFL-PPO, proposed by us for our federated settings, learns a per-client trust score at the server and feeds it back to each client to jointly guide aggregation and local optimization. Fig. 2 depicts the overall architecture of this bidirectional client-server interaction. 9A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Algorithm 1 Centralized MAPPO-MoE for Cost-Aware Multimodal HAR 

Input: Sensor streams {D c}Cc=1 , sensor costs {κc}

Output: Cost-aware multimodal fusion policy {πc}

Stage 1: Independent Expert Pretraining  

> 1:

Train each encoder-expert pair (fc, g c) independently on modality Dc

Stage 2: Baseline MoE  

> 2:

Train joint fusion with equal weights: 

ˆy = 1

C

> C

X

> c=1

gc(fc(xc)) 

Stage 3: MAPPO Policy Learning  

> 3:

for each training step do  

> 4:

Compute shared state s = [ f1(x1)∥ · · · ∥ fC (xC )]  

> 5:

Each agent c samples fusion weight wc ∼ πc(s) 

> 6:

Fuse experts: ˆy = PCc=1 ˜wc gc(fc(xc)) , where ˜wc = softmax( w)c 

> 7:

Compute reward: 

r =  ˆpMAPPO  

> y

− ˆpeq 

> y

| {z }

> accuracy gain

−λ

PCc=1 ˜wcκc

PCc=1 κc

| {z } 

> sensor cost
> 8:

Update {πc} and V via PPO  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return {πc}

4.2.1 Server State Representation 

At the start of round t, each client c ∈ { 1, . . . , N } sends the server a short summary of how its most recent local training went: its validation accuracy atc, its average training loss ℓtc, and the norm of its gradients gtc (clipped and normalized to 

[0 , 1] so that no single client can dominate the signal). Together with each client’s data-share fc = |Dc|/ P 

> j

|Dj |, how much of the total training data that client holds, which never changes round to round, these four numbers per client are stacked into a server state vector St ∈ R4N .A single round’s accuracy or loss can be a noisy, unreliable snapshot: a client might have an unusually good or bad batch purely by chance. To avoid the server reacting to this noise, both signals are smoothed using an exponential moving average, each round’s value is blended with the running history rather than trusted outright: 

¯atc = βs¯at−1 

> c

+ (1 − βs)atc, ¯ℓtc = βs ¯ℓt−1 

> c

+ (1 − βs)ℓtc,

with smoothing factor βs = 0 .6, meaning the server’s belief about a client updates gradually rather than jumping to match every new observation. 

4.2.2 Formulating Trust Assignment as Reinforcement Learning 

Rather than fixing a hand-designed rule for how much to trust each client, we cast this decision as a standard reinforcement learning problem, with the server acting once per communication round. This requires four ingredients: a state describing the current round, an action representing a trust decision, a policy that chooses actions, and a reward 

telling the policy how good a given decision turned out to be. 

State. As described above, the state St ∈ R4N summarizes every client’s recent behaviour, its smoothed accuracy, smoothed loss, gradient norm, and data-share, concatenated across all N clients: 

St = ¯at

> 1

, ¯ℓt

> 1

, g t

> 1

, f 1, . . . , ¯atN , ¯ℓtN , g tN , f N

.

Action. The action is a candidate trust weight for every client at once, at = ( ˜ wt

> 1

, . . . , ˜wtN ) ∈ (0 , 2) N , drawn directly from the policy rather than computed deterministically. This is precisely the stochastic sample ˜w used later to build the counterfactual model for reward computation, action and sampled trust weight are the same quantity, distinct from the smoothed, deterministic trust value that is actually used for aggregation and client feedback. 10 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Algorithm 2 BiFL-PPO: Bidirectional Federated Optimization 

Input: K clients with datasets {D c}; rounds R; local epochs E; PPO update interval U = 3 

Output: Global model θR; trust vector ema R

1: Initialize global model θ0; policy πθ ; critic Vϕ

2: Initialize trust ema 0 ← 1/N, ∀c; buffer B ← ∅ 

3: for round t = 1 , . . . , R do 

// Local training using previous round’s trust ema t−1

4: for each client c ∈ { 1, . . . , N } do 

5: θtc ← LOCAL UPDATE (θt−1, Dc)

Local learning rate and proximal strength are scaled by ema t−1

> c

(higher trust → higher learning rate, weaker penalty) 

6: Client sends θtc, atc, ℓtc, and gtc to the server 

7: end for 

// Server state 

8: ¯atc ← βs¯at−1 

> c

+ (1 − βs)atc, ∀c

9: ¯ℓtc ← βs ¯ℓt−1 

> c

+ (1 − βs)ℓtc, ∀c

10: St ← [¯ atc, ¯ℓtc, g tc, f c]Nc=1 

// Policy and prior blend 

11: (αc, β c) ← softplus(head c(trunk( St))) , ∀c

12: plearned ← softmax(2 E[Beta( αc, β c)]) 

13: pprior  

> c

← softmax  βp(¯ atc − max j ¯atj )

14: pcommit ← αppprior + (1 − αp)plearned 

15: ema t ← γeema t−1 + (1 − γe)pcommit 

16: ema t ← max(ema t, τ min )

// Aggregate and give bidirectional feedback 

17: θt ← PNc=1 [βwema tc + (1 − βw)fc] θtc

18: Report evaluation model as an exponential moving average of θt with decay 0.7 for training stability 

// Reward: counterfactual aggregation, discarded after use 

19: Sample ˜wc ∼ 2Beta( αc, β c), forming at = ( ˜ w1, . . . , ˜wN )

20: Record log πθ (at | St)

21: rt ← Acc val (Agg( {θtc}, a t)) − λv Var( at)

22: rt ← λr rt−1 + (1 − λr )rt

23: Store (St, log πθ , r t) in B

24: if t mod U = 0 then 

25: for each buffered step τ in B, backward do 

26: δτ ← rτ + γV ϕ(Sτ +1 ) − Vϕ(Sτ )

27: ˆAτ ← δτ + γλ ˆAτ +1 

28: ˆRτ ← ˆAτ + Vϕ(Sτ )

29: end for 

γ = 0 .99 , λ = 0 .95 ; Vϕ is evaluated on demand from stored Sτ

30: Update πθ using clipped-surrogate PPO loss with entropy bonus and { ˆAτ }

31: Update Vϕ using MSE regression onto { ˆRτ }

32: B ← ∅ 

33: end if 

34: end for 

Policy. The policy defines a probability distribution over actions given the current state, factorized independently across clients: 

πθ (at | St) = 

> N

Y

> c=1

Beta 

 ˜wtc

2 ; αc, β c



, αc, β c = softplus  head c(trunk( St)) .

Sampling an action means drawing each client’s weight independently from its own Beta distribution, then scaling by 2:

˜wtc ∼ 2 · Beta( αc, β c).

Reward. The reward measures how well a sampled action would have performed, had it actually been used for aggregation, the resulting model is constructed solely for this purpose and discarded afterward, without affecting the 11 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Figure 2: Overview of the BiFL-PPO server-client architecture. Each client reports its local training state St (validation accuracy, loss, gradient norm, data-share) to a shared server-side trunk network; per-client heads then produce trust weights wt, which are sent back to each client and simultaneously used to weight aggregation. Transitions (St, log π, r t)

are stored in a trajectory buffer and, every three rounds, used to compute Generalized Advantage Estimates and perform a PPO update on the policy and critic. actual aggregated model, penalized to discourage overconfident, degenerate trust assignments: 

rt = Acc val 

 Agg( {θtc}, a t) − λv Var( at),

further smoothed across rounds via rt 

> smooth

= λr rt−1 

> smooth

+ (1 − λr ) rt before being used for training. 

Value function. A separate critic Vϕ(St) estimates the expected discounted return from state St, used together with the reward to compute the GAE-based advantage that ultimately drives the PPO update described later in this section. 

4.2.3 Policy and Value Networks 

Given this state, the server needs to decide how much to trust each client. Rather than outputting a single trust number directly, the server policy πθ outputs, for each client, the two parameters of a Beta distribution, essentially a belief about what the right trust value should be, rather than a single committed guess. This shared-trunk, per-client-head design lets the server build one unified understanding of the round while each small head only learns to specialize it into that client’s own trust belief, keeping parameters far smaller than N independent networks and naturally supporting cross-client comparisons a per-client-isolated network could not express. All N clients’ distributions are produced by a shared network (the “trunk”) that first builds a general understanding of the whole round, followed by a small client-specific “head” that turns that shared understanding into one client’s own parameters: 

αc, β c = softplus  head c(trunk( St)) , wc ∼ 2 · Beta( αc, β c) ∈ (0 , 2) .

A Beta distribution is used here instead of the more common Gaussian because it naturally stays within a fixed range on its own, no need to manually clip the output afterward, while still being flexible enough to express either strong, confident trust in a client (a sharply peaked distribution) or genuine uncertainty (a flat, close-to-uniform distribution) depending on what the network has learned. Alongside this policy, the critic network Vϕ(St) introduced above learns to estimate how good the current round’s situation is overall, which is later used to judge whether a specific trust decision turned out better or worse than expected. 12 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

4.2.4 Trust Computation and Bidirectional Feedback 

The policy’s raw output is not used on its own, it is combined with a simple, hand-designed rule of thumb: clients with higher recent accuracy should generally be trusted more. This rule is expressed as a prior probability that favors higher-accuracy clients, 

pprior  

> c

= exp( βp(¯ atc − max j ¯atj )) 

P 

> k

exp( βp(¯ atk − max j ¯atj )) , pcommit = αp pprior + (1 − αp) plearned ,

where plearned = softmax  2 · E[Beta( αc, β c)]  is the policy’s own trust estimate, obtained by normalizing each client’s Beta-distribution mean into a probability across clients. The two are blended together, so the learned policy is guided by this common-sense prior rather than starting from nothing. The result is then smoothed across rounds with its own momentum term ( ema t = γe ema t−1 + (1 − γe) pcommit ) so trust does not swing sharply from one round to the next, and a minimum trust floor τmin ensures no client is ever completely excluded, however low its recent performance. This final trust value is used in two places at once, which is what makes the scheme bidirectional . First, it determines the server-side aggregation weight for each client, blended with that client’s static data-share so that trust does not entirely override the amount of data a client actually contributes: 

θt =

> N

X

> c=1

 βw ema tc + (1 − βw) fc

 θtc,

which is the aggregation rule referenced as Agg( ·) in the reward computation above. Second, this same trust value is fed back to each client to shape its own next round of local training, a more trusted client gets a higher effective learning rate, while a less trusted one is pulled more strongly back toward the current global model through a stronger proximal penalty. In effect, a client the server currently doubts is both counted for less at aggregation time and held on a tighter leash during its own training. 

4.2.5 PPO Update 

Rather than updating after every communication round, the server accumulates experience over three rounds before performing a PPO update. For each buffered transition t, the temporal-difference residual is 

δt = rt + γ V ϕ(St+1 ) − Vϕ(St),

and Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) combines these residuals with exponential decay γλ across the buffered window: 

ˆAt = δt + γλ ˆAt+1 , ˆRt = ˆAt + Vϕ(St),

computed recursively backward through the buffer ( γ = 0 .99 , λ = 0 .95 ), where ˆRt is the return target used to train the critic. The policy is then updated using PPO’s clipped-surrogate objective with an entropy bonus to encourage exploration, while the critic is trained via MSE regression toward ˆRt.

4.2.6 Training Stability 

To improve training stability, three additional measures are adopted. First, optimizer momentum is preserved across communication rounds to maintain learning dynamics. Second, each client’s learning rate decays gradually to 

30% of its initial value by the final round. Third, model performance is reported using an exponential moving av-erage (Polyak averaging, decay 0.7) of the global model, providing a more stable estimate than the raw aggregated model. We apply our proposed approach to every federated aggregation method in Sec. 3.4. Local client optimization remains unchanged; only the aggregation weight is modified, replacing pk = nk/n with αk = β ˆwk + (1 − β) pk, a blend of pk

and a trust weight ˆwk learned by a server-side PPO agent from each client’s local accuracy, loss, and gradient norm (β = 0 .85 ), trained on a reward from the counterfactual validation accuracy of a sampled weight assignment, penalized by its variance and smoothed across rounds. Substituting αk for pk in each method’s aggregation rule, the weighted sum for FedAvg, FedProx, and AdaFedProx; P 

> k

αkdk with τeff = P 

> k

αkτk for FedNova; and the non-BN average for FedBN, gives a uniform PPO-guided aggregation across all five baselines while preserving each method’s own local objective and aggregation structure. 13 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

## 5 Experimental Setup 

All experiments were conducted in Python 3.12 using PyTorch 2.12 on a single NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU (16 GB VRAM). The proposed centralized MAPPO-MoE framework and federated FL PPO FedAvg model were implemented from scratch, with all reinforcement learning components developed using native PyTorch modules. For federated learning, a sensor-heterogeneous client partition strategy was adopted, where each sensor modality was treated as an independent client and only the expert classifier heads were aggregated globally. Baseline methods including FedAvg , FedProx ,

FedBN , AdaFedProx , FedNova , and FedDPO were implemented under the same architecture and evaluation protocol to ensure a fair comparison. Table 1: Hyperparameter Settings for Centralized and Federated Learning                                                 

> Hyperparameter Centralized Federated
> Pretraining Epochs 40 –MoE Training Epochs 40 –MAPPO Training Epochs 60 –Communication Rounds –50 Local Epochs (MEx) –3Local Epochs (UTD-MHAD) –2Model Learning Rate 5×10 −45×10 −4
> PPO Actor Learning Rate 1×10 −43×10 −4
> PPO Critic Learning Rate 1×10 −43×10 −4
> PPO Clip ( ϵ)0.2 0.2 Entropy Coefficient 0.01 0.05 Discount Factor ( γ)0.99 0.99 GAE Parameter ( λ)0.95 0.95 Cost Weight ( λcost )0.3 0.3 Rollout Buffer Size 32 16 Gradient Clipping 1.0 1.0 Label Smoothing 0.1 0.1

5.1 Dataset Description 

This subsection presents a brief description of the two datasets used in FedMHAR , namely MEx and UTD MHAD. 

5.1.1 MEx Dataset 

The MEx (Multi-modal Exercise) dataset [37] is a publicly available Human Activity Recognition (HAR) dataset designed for exercise recognition and rehabilitation monitoring. It contains data from 30 subjects performing 7 physiotherapy exercises using multiple sensor modalities, including wearable accelerometers, a pressure mat, and a depth camera. The dataset is widely used for research in multimodal sensor fusion, activity recognition, and deep learning-based HAR systems. 

5.1.2 UTD MHAD Dataset 

The UTD-MHAD (University of Texas at Dallas Multimodal Human Action Dataset) [38] is a benchmark dataset for multimodal human activity recognition, comprising 27 actions performed by 8 subjects with synchronized RGB, depth, skeleton, and inertial data. In this work, we use the 3D skeletal joint positions and inertial signals (accelerometer and gyroscope), while excluding RGB and depth modalities to maintain a lightweight and privacy-preserving framework. In addition, we derive a third modality, joint velocity, by normalizing the skeleton sequence and then taking its frame-to-frame difference: 

ˆp(t) 

> j

= p(t) 

> j

− μj

σj

, v(t) 

> j

=

(0, t = 1 ˆp(t) 

> j

− ˆp(t−1)  

> j

, t = 2 , . . . , T, 

where p(t) 

> j

∈ R3 denotes the 3D position of joint j at frame t, and ˆp(t) 

> j

its z-score normalized coordinate over the sequence. The first frame’s velocity is set to zero rather than shortening the sequence, keeping joint velocity the same length as the other modalities. Joint velocity captures motion dynamics complementary to static joint positions, without requiring additional sensors. Thus, our framework utilizes three modalities: skeleton position, joint velocity, and inertial signals. 14 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

## 6 Results & Discussion 

This section presents the results of FedMHAR in both centralized and federated settings, organized by the two datasets, and compares its performance with state-of-the-art federated learning methods. 

6.1 Centralized Setup 

For the centralized setup, the different modalities of the multimodal datasets are fused using the Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework, while MAPPO performs weighted fusion to determine the importance of each modality for recognizing a specific activity. 

6.1.1 MEx Dataset  

> (a) (b)

Figure 3: (a) Loss value of the actor network of MAPPO for MEx dataset; (b) Loss value of the critic network of MAPPO for MEx dataset; Fig. 3(a) and Figure 3(b) show the MAPPO actor and critic losses on the MEx dataset after applying return normalization and a cosine-annealed critic learning rate. The actor loss decreases rapidly from approximately 0.191 to 0.017 by epoch 60, while the critic loss drops from approximately 0.685 to a stable plateau around 0.53 . Both losses converge within the first approx. 10 epochs and remain stable thereafter, demonstrating faster and smoother optimization than the earlier configuration. The improved stability is attributed to return normalization and the adaptive critic learning rate, which provide better-conditioned value targets and lower-variance advantage estimates, resulting in more stable policy updates. Fig. 4 compares the test accuracy of the proposed MAPPO-MoE with the Baseline MoE on the MEx dataset. The Baseline MoE achieves an accuracy of 82.24% using equal-weight fusion of all sensor modalities, whereas MAPPO-MoE consistently maintains higher accuracy throughout training and attains a peak accuracy of 89.47%, corresponding 

Figure 4: The Improvement of the MAPPO-Based Centralized Architecture with respect to the Baseline MoE for MEx Dataset 15 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 to an improvement of 7.24 percentage points. The performance gain is attributed to the adaptive modality fusion mechanism of MAPPO-MoE, where PPO agents dynamically learn the importance of individual sensor modalities based on their contribution to activity recognition. Unlike static equal-weight fusion, the proposed approach emphasizes the most informative sensors for each exercise while reducing the influence of less relevant modalities, resulting in more discriminative feature representations and improved classification performance across the physiotherapy activities in the MEx dataset. Table 2: Classification Report for MAPPO MoE 

Exercise Precision Recall F1-score 

Knee-rolling 0.81 0.91 0.86 Bridging 0.83 0.80 0.82 Pelvic-tilt 0.93 0.83 0.88 The-clam 0.88 0.88 0.88 Ext-in-lying 0.98 0.94 0.96 Prone-punches 0.93 0.81 0.87 Superman 0.84 1.00 0.91 Table 2 presents the per-class precision, recall, and F1-score of MAPPO-MoE on the MEx dataset, providing a detailed assessment of its performance across all seven physiotherapy exercises. The MAPPO-MoE achieves strong and balanced performance across all exercise classes, with the highest F1-score obtained for Ext-in-Lying (0.96). Most classes achieve F1-scores above 0.85, demonstrating the model’s ability to effectively distinguish between physiotherapy exercises with subtle biomechanical differences. The comparatively lower performance on Bridging (0.82) reflects the inherent similarity between certain exercises and the variability in their execution. Overall, the results show that adaptive sensor fusion enables the model to exploit the most informative sensor placements for each exercise, leading to a 7.24% improvement over the equal-weight Baseline MoE and highlighting the effectiveness of RL-driven modality weighting for physiotherapy activity recognition. Table 3: Comparison of Baseline MoE and MAPPO MoE Fusion on the MEx Dataset (5-Seed Evaluation) 

Method Test Accuracy (%, Mean ± Std) 

Baseline MoE 85.07 ± 4.04 MAPPO MoE (Ours) 87.30 ± 2.53 

We evaluate the centralized fusion model across five random seeds (42, 7, 123, 99, 2024), with results summarized in Table 3. The proposed MAPPO-based MoE fusion achieves a mean test accuracy of 0.87 ± 0.03, outperforming the equally weighted Baseline MoE (0.85 ± 0.04) by 0.023. In addition to improving accuracy, MAPPO reduces performance variance, lowering the standard deviation from 0.04 to 0.03. The MAPPO model outperforms the baseline in four of the five seeds, demonstrating that adaptive policy-learned fusion yields both higher accuracy and more stable performance than uniform expert aggregation. 

6.1.2 UTD MHAD Dataset 

Fig. 5 (a) and Fig. 5 (b) present the MAPPO actor and critic losses averaged over five seeds across 60 training epochs. The actor loss decreases from 0.0612 to 0.0184 , while the critic loss decreases from 1.7037 to 1.4626 . Both losses exhibit higher fluctuations during the first 20 epochs before converging to a stable downward trend, reflecting the coupled learning dynamics of the actor and critic as value estimates become more reliable. The remaining fluctuations arise from PPO’s minibatch updates and the stochastic reward function combining classification accuracy and sensor-cost terms. Since these losses are reward-based optimization objectives rather than classification losses, they should be interpreted relative to their convergence behavior rather than their absolute magnitudes. Fig. 6 represents the performance of the MAPPO-based MoE with respect to the baseline MoE for the UTD MHAD 

dataset. The MAPPO-MoE achieves a 5.12% improvement over the Baseline MoE on UTD-MHAD due to its ability to adaptively weight sensor modalities according to their relevance for different action types. UTD-MHAD contains diverse activities ranging from fine hand gestures to full-body movements, where the discriminative power of skeleton, inertial, and joint velocity modalities varies considerably. While the Baseline MoE assigns equal importance to all modalities, MAPPO learns dynamic modality weights through reinforcement learning, emphasizing inertial signals 16 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026  

> (a) (b)

Figure 5: (a) Loss value of the actor network of MAPPO for UTD MHAD dataset; (b) Loss value of the critic network of MAPPO for UTD MHAD dataset; 

Figure 6: The Improvement of the MAPPO-Based Centralized Architecture with respect to the Baseline MoE for UTD MHAD Dataset for hand-centric actions, skeleton information for posture-based activities, and joint velocity features for dynamic movements. Table 4 presents the per-class precision, recall, and F1-score of the proposed MAPPO-MoE model on the UTD-MHAD dataset, providing a detailed evaluation of its classification performance across all 27 activity classes. The MAPPO-MoE demonstrates strong and consistent performance on UTD-MHAD, achieving perfect F1-scores for 14 of the 27 action classes and near-perfect performance for most of the remaining classes. The model effectively recognizes both fine-grained hand gestures and full-body activities by adaptively leveraging complementary information from skeleton, inertial, and joint velocity modalities. The few remaining errors are concentrated in inherently challenging actions such as knock and catch, which exhibit high inter-class similarity and intra-class variability. Overall, the high weighted F1-score of 0.96 highlights the effectiveness of the proposed cost-aware multi-agent fusion strategy in learning robust representations across diverse human activities. We evaluate the centralized multimodal fusion framework across five random seeds (42, 123, 2024, 7, 99) on the UTD-MHAD dataset, with results summarised in Table 5. The proposed MAPPO-based mixture-of-experts fusion achieves a mean test accuracy of 0.95 ± 0.01 , outperforming the uniformly-weighted Baseline MoE (0 .83 ± 0.01) by a substantial margin of +0 .12 averaged across all seeds. This gain is consistent and large, MAPPO improves over the Baseline by between +0 .11 and +0 .14 depending on the seed, with no seed where the Baseline comes close to the MAPPO result. The low standard deviations of both methods ( 0.01 for Baseline and 0.01 for MAPPO) confirm that these results are highly reproducible and not dependent on fortunate initialization. 17 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 Table 4: Classification Report for MAPPO MoE                                                                                                     

> Class PRF1 Class PRF1
> swipe-left 0.89 1.00 0.94 arm-curl 1.00 1.00 1.00 swipe-right 0.89 1.00 0.94 tennis-serve 1.00 1.00 1.00 wave 0.84 1.00 0.91 push 0.94 1.00 0.97 clap 0.94 1.00 0.97 knock 0.92 0.75 0.83 throw 1.00 0.88 0.93 catch 1.00 0.62 0.77 arm-cross 1.00 1.00 1.00 pickup-throw 1.00 0.88 0.93 basketball-shoot 1.00 1.00 1.00 jog 1.00 1.00 1.00 draw-x 0.89 1.00 0.94 walk 1.00 1.00 1.00 draw-circle-cw 1.00 1.00 1.00 sit2stand 1.00 1.00 1.00 draw-circle-ccw 1.00 1.00 1.00 stand2sit 1.00 1.00 1.00 draw-triangle 1.00 1.00 1.00 forward-lunge 0.89 1.00 0.94 bowling 0.84 1.00 0.91 squat 1.00 1.00 1.00 boxing 1.00 1.00 1.00 baseball-swing 1.00 1.00 1.00 tennis-swing 1.00 0.81 0.90

Table 5: Comparison of Baseline MoE and MAPPO MoE Fusion on the UTD-MHAD Dataset (5-Seed Evaluation) 

Method Test Accuracy (%, Mean ± Std) 

Baseline MoE 82.84 ± 0.67 

MAPPO MoE (Ours) 94.98 ± 0.88 Mean Improvement +12.14  

> (a) (b)

Figure 7: (a) Test Accuracy of SOTA FL methods over epochs (b) Test Accuracy of SOTA FL with PPO over epochs. 

6.2 Federated Learning Setup 6.2.1 MEx Dataset 

Fig. 7 (a) and Fig. 7 (b) show epoch-wise test accuracy over 50 communication rounds for the vanilla and PPO-enhanced variants of the five baseline aggregation methods, respectively. In the vanilla setting, all five methods converge to a narrow band between 63% and 67% by round 50, with FedBN and FedProx reaching the highest final accuracy (approx. 66–67%) and FedAvg, AdaFedProx, and FedNova converging slightly lower (approx. 63–64%). With our proposed PPO-based aggregation, every method improves over its vanilla counterpart: FedNova shows the largest gain ( +8% ,from 64% to 72% ), followed by FedAvg ( +5% ), FedBN and AdaFedProx ( +4% each), and FedProx showing the smallest but still positive improvement ( +1% ). This consistent, positive gain across all five methods, despite their differing local optimization strategies (proximal regularization, step normalization, local batch-norm), supports our central claim that adaptively re-weighting client contributions via a learned, server-side trust policy provides a benefit that is complementary to, rather than a substitute for, each method’s existing heterogeneity-handling mechanism. 18 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Figure 8: Confusion matrices of Baseline MoE and MAPPO-MoE on the MEx dataset We additionally observe that FedBN converges fastest in early rounds in both figures (reaching approx. 50% accuracy by round 11, versus 39% for the other four methods), consistent with its client-local Batch Normalization layers adapting quickly to feature-distribution heterogeneity across clients, a correction the other methods’ gradient-based mechanisms achieve only more gradually. FedDPO (Fig. 7 (b)), which uses a separate reinforcement-learning policy to directly decide how strongly each client should be pulled back toward the global model during its own local training, rather than adaptively re-weighting client contributions at server-side aggregation, plateaus near 63 –64% from round 30 onward, below all five PPO-aggregated methods, suggesting that server-side, trust-weighted aggregation is a more effective use of a learned policy in this setting than client-side proximal tuning alone. Table 6: Bidirectional Server-PPO (BiFL-PPO) vs. FedAvg on MEx Dataset (5-seed, non-IID Dirichlet α=0 .5). 

Method Mean Std 

FedAvg 78.09 4.83 

BiFL-PPO (Ours) 79.74 0.98 

Mean improvement (BiFL-PPO − FedAvg) +1.64 –We evaluate the proposed Bidirectional Federated Learning framework with Server-PPO aggregation (BiFL-PPO) against the FedAvg baseline under a non-IID Dirichlet label split ( α=0 .5) across five random seeds, with results summarised in Table 6. BiFL-PPO achieves a mean test accuracy of 79 .74% compared to 78 .09% for FedAvg, a mean gain of +1 .64 percentage points. More notably, the standard deviation of BiFL-PPO across seeds is 0.98% , nearly five times smaller than FedAvg’s 4.83% , demonstrating substantially more consistent convergence under heterogeneous data conditions. BiFL-PPO outperforms FedAvg on four of the five seeds; the single exception (seed 2024, −4.28% )corresponds to a Dirichlet partition that assigns one client an unusually representative shard, an outlier condition that gives FedAvg’s uniform averaging an atypical advantage. The stability gain is the primary practical contribution of the bidirectional design: by feeding the PPO-learned per-client trust weights back to clients as adaptive learning-rate and proximal-penalty signals, BiFL-PPO suppresses the client drift that causes FedAvg to produce high-variance results across seeds, yielding a more reliable global model under the non-IID data heterogeneity that characterises real-world federated deployments. Fig. 8 represents the normalized confusion matrices for the Baseline MoE and MAPPO-MoE on the MEx dataset. The confusion matrices highlight the class pairs that are most difficult to distinguish and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed MAPPO-based fusion strategy. The baseline MoE exhibits substantial confusion between Bridge and Pelvic Tilt (32% and 17%, respectively) and relatively low recognition of Clam (69%). In contrast, MAPPO-MoE significantly improves the true positive rates of these challenging classes, increasing Bridge recognition from 68% to 84%, Clam from 69% to 88%, and Pelvic Tilt from 83% to 100%. Although minor degradations are observed for Knee Roll and Extension in Lying, the overall confusion is reduced, indicating that MAPPO learns more discriminative modality fusion and better distinguishes exercises with similar motion patterns. 19 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 Table 7: Confusion Matrix and Per-Class Metrics for MAPPO MoE (MEx)                                                                                   

> True \Pred Knee-roll. Bridging Pelvic-ti. The-clam Ext-in-ly. Prone-pun. Superman Precision Recall F1-score Knee-roll. 170 0150001.00 0.97 0.98
> Bridging 0160 312 0220.79 0.89 0.84
> Pelvic-ti. 043 78 33 5311 0.93 0.45 0.61
> The-clam 002158 0000.76 0.99 0.86
> Ext-in-ly. 0001182 000.96 0.99 0.98
> Prone-pun. 00002143 33 0.97 0.80 0.88
> Superman 000000173 0.79 1.00 0.88

Figure 9: Test Accuracy: SOTA FL vs. Server PPO Aggregator for MEx Dataset Table 7 reports the confusion matrix and per class metrics for MAPPO MoE on MEx across seven exercises. Of the 1222 test samples, 1064 are correctly classified, giving an overall accuracy of 87.07 percent. Pelvic tilt is the primary source of error, with only 45 percent recall, mostly confused with Bridging, 43 samples, and The clam, 33 samples. This also lowers precision for Bridging and Superman to 79 percent each, since many Pelvic tilt and Prone punches samples are misclassified into these two classes. The remaining exercises, Knee rolling, The clam, Extension in lying, and Superman, all exceed 96 percent recall, indicating that Pelvic tilt is the main source of confusion while the rest of the classes are classified reliably. Table 8 reports the confusion matrix and per class precision, recall, and F1 score for MAPPO MoE on UTD MHAD across all 27 actions. Of the 430 test samples, 412 are correctly classified, giving an overall accuracy of 95.81 percent, with 22 of the 27 classes achieving perfect precision, recall, and F1 score. The remaining errors are concentrated in a small number of classes rather than spread across the full action set. Catch accounts for the largest share of errors, with predictions scattered across five different classes including Swipe left, Swipe right, Draw X, Push, and Knock, indicating that this action lacks a consistent, distinguishing signal captured by the model. Draw triangle is confused entirely with Draw circle counter clockwise, and Knock is confused mostly with Clap, both plausibly explained by the kinematic similarity between each pair of actions. These results indicate that the model performs reliably across most of the action set, with a small number of visually or kinematically similar actions accounting for nearly all of the remaining classification errors. Fig. 9 compares the mean test accuracy of five vanilla FL baselines and their Server PPO-enhanced variants on the MEx physiotherapy exercise dataset. Results are averaged over five independent random seeds 42, 7, 123, 999, 2024, using 30 communication rounds and 5 PPO warmup rounds. Error bars represent one standard deviation across seeds. The Server PPO aggregator consistently improves performance, achieving gains of +2.50% (FedAvg), +2.92% (FedProx), +6.25% (FedBN), +6.67% (AdaFedProx), and +0.83% (FedNova). In addition, the PPO-enhanced variants generally exhibit lower variability across seeds, indicating improved training stability and reproducibility. Overall, the results demonstrate that adaptive PPO-based aggregation provides a consistent advantage over conventional static aggregation methods. 20 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026  

> (a) (b)

Figure 10: (a) Test Accuracy of SOTA FL on UTD MHAD dataset; (b) Test Accuracy of SOTA FL using PPO on UTD MHAD dataset 

Figure 11: Test Accuracy: SOTA FL vs. Server PPO Aggregator for UTD MHAD Dataset 

6.2.2 UTD MHAD Dataset 

Fig. 10 presents the per-round test accuracy trajectory of all federated learning methods over 50 communication rounds on the UTD-MHAD dataset, which comprises 27 action classes captured from three sensor modalities, skeleton, inertial, and joint velocity (derived). The proposed architecture exhibits significantly faster convergence than all baseline methods, reaching approximately 

82% accuracy by round 2 and exceeding 91% by round 5, whereas the baselines remain between 35 − − 60% during the same period. The proposed method also achieves the highest peak accuracy of 96 .05% , outperforming FedAvg 

(95 .81%) , AdaFedProx (92 .79%) , FedNova (91 .63%) , and FedDPO (91 .16%) . Moreover, it maintains a stable accuracy range of 93 − 96% throughout training, while the baselines exhibit greater fluctuations and slower convergence. The superior performance of FL PPO FedAvg stems from its ability to dynamically learn modality-specific aggregation weights through PPO agents. By jointly optimizing classification performance and sensor cost, the agents quickly identify the most informative modalities and assign aggregation weights accordingly. This adaptive aggregation strategy is particularly effective for UTD-MHAD, where modalities differ significantly in their information content and dimensionality. Consequently, the proposed method achieves faster convergence, improved stability, and consistently higher accuracy than conventional federated aggregation approaches. Fig. 11 presents the UTD-MHAD 5-seed ablation study comparing vanilla FL baselines and their Server PPO-enhanced variants across five random seeds 42, 7, 123, 999, 2024, evaluated over 50 communication rounds with 5 warmup rounds and 5 local epochs per round. The Server PPO aggregator maintains or slightly improves performance for FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN, and AdaFedProx, indicating that these methods already achieve near-optimal performance 21 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 on the dataset. The largest gain is observed for FedNova, where Server PPO improves the mean accuracy from 90.19% to 91.02% (+0.84%) while reducing the standard deviation from ±1.82% to ±1.30%. These results demonstrate that adaptive PPO-based aggregation can improve both accuracy and robustness, particularly for methods sensitive to variations in client updates. Table 9: 5-Seed Ablation Study: SOTA FL vs. Server PPO Aggregator for UTD MHAD Dataset 

Method Vanilla Mean ±Std ServerPPO Mean ±Std 

FedAvg 73.0 ± 4.43 77.5 ± 3.26 

FedProx 74.40 ± 2.87 77.30 ± 1.59 

FedBN 73.9 ± 2.65 77.3 ± 2.95 

AdaFedProx 73.26 ± 2.62 77.2 ± 1.84 

FedNova 73.7 ± 3.55 76.4 ± 2.27 

FedDPO 73.6 ± 2.55 –Table 9 presents the per-seed results of the UTD-MHAD 5-seed ablation study across seeds 42, 7, 123, 999, 2024. Overall, Server PPO achieves higher or equal accuracy in 18 out of 25 seed-method comparisons, corresponding to a non-deterioration rate of 72%. The most consistent gains are observed for FedNova, where Server PPO improves performance in four out of five seeds, increasing the mean accuracy from 90.19% to 91.02% (+0.84%) while reducing the standard deviation from ±1.82% to ±1.30%. In contrast, FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN, and AdaFedProx exhibit only marginal changes (within ±0.05%), suggesting that their aggregation dynamics are already near convergence. These results indicate that the Server PPO policy is particularly effective when meaningful inter-client variability exists, enabling more stable and accurate aggregation than static weighting schemes. 

## 7 Baseline Results 

This section presents the comparison of the performance of FedMHAR with respect to the state-of-the-art federated methods. 

7.1 MEx Dataset 

Table 10: Comparison with Baselines on MEx 

Category Method Accuracy (%) 

Prior Baselines LSTM-CNN [10] 84 .61 ± 3.09 

MhaGNN [32] 87 .11 ± 2.62 

TCN-Inception [39] 81 .38 ± 3.22 

HART [40] 80 .00 ± 4.35 

MobileHART [40] 84 .08 ± 2.74 

Centralised Baseline MoE 84 .80 ± 2.53 

MAPPO-MoE 87 .11 ± 2.83 

Table 10 compares MAPPO-MoE with LSTM-CNN, MhaGNN, and TCN-Inception on the MEx dataset. While TCN-Inception and MhaGNN benefit from multi-scale temporal modelling and graph based cross modal learning, respectively, MAPPO-MoE achieves the highest accuracy of 87 .30% ± 2.53% . The improvement stems from its PPO-based adaptive fusion policy, which dynamically adjusts modality contributions on a per sample basis while considering sensor cost. The lower standard deviation further indicates more stable performance across random seeds. 22 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

7.2 UTD MHAD 

Table 11: Comparison with Baselines on UTD-MHAD 

Category Method Accuracy (%) 

Prior Baselines LSTM-CNN [10] 92 .74 ± 0.98 

MhaGNN [32] 92 .88 ± 0.54 

TCN-Inception [39] 93 .40 ± 0.71 

HART [40] 61 .77 ± 2.61 

MobileHART [40] 75 .07 ± 2.53 

Centralised Baseline MoE 82 .84 ± 0.67 

MAPPO-MoE 94 .98 ± 0.88 

Table 11 presents results on the more heterogeneous UTD-MHAD dataset. MAPPO-MoE achieves 94 .98% ± 0.88% ,outperforming all baselines by a significant margin. The gain highlights the effectiveness of adaptive modality weighting when sensor streams provide complementary information. Unlike fixed-weight or static graph-based fusion methods, MAPPO-MoE learns activity-dependent modality importance, leading to both higher accuracy and the lowest variance across seeds, demonstrating robust and consistent performance. 

## 8 Ablation Study 

Table 12 presents the centralized modality ablation results on MEx , comparing the baseline MoE with the proposed MAPPO-guided MoE across all single-, double-, triple-, and full-modality subsets (3-seed mean ±std). The results show that the benefit of MAPPO increases with the number of available modalities. Using all four modalities, MAPPO improves accuracy from 0.84 to 0.91 while reducing the standard deviation from ±0.04 to ±0.01, demonstrating both higher accuracy and improved stability. For single-modality settings, MAPPO provides little benefit, as there is no expert coordination to optimize. It yields marginal gains for act and pm , but slightly degrades performance for acw and dc . In contrast, consistent improvements are observed in multi-modality settings where adaptive expert weighting becomes important. The largest gains are achieved for complementary modality pairs such as act+pm (+0.06) and for challenging three-modality subsets, particularly when dc is removed (+0.09). Overall, the results indicate that MAPPO is most effective in complex multimodal scenarios where expert coordination is essential, while remaining largely neutral when fusion offers limited benefit. This demonstrates that the proposed policy learns meaningful modality interactions and provides the greatest advantage in practical multimodal HAR settings. 23 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 Table 12: Centralized Modality Ablation on MEx Dataset 

Modalities Baseline MoE (%) MAPPO MoE (%) 

acw 41.01 ± 0.76 35.20 ± 2.16 act 61.95 ± 1.98 62.39 ± 1.00 

dc 77.74 ± 2.42 75.99 ± 2.16 pm 66.78 ± 4.30 66.89 ± 6.65 

acw+act 68.31 ± 2.38 71.16 ± 1.00 

acw+dc 76.21 ± 2.01 75.33 ± 0.33 acw+pm 64.04 ± 1.87 60.86 ± 3.56 act+dc 78.51 ± 2.84 78.95 ± 1.74 

act+pm 68.20 ± 2.66 74.67 ± 0.57 

dc+pm 83.11 ± 3.13 79.21 ± 4.61 

acw+act+dc 76.10 ± 1.25 81.58 ± 3.43 

acw+act+pm 65.57 ± 1.00 75.00 ± 6.03 

acw+pm+dc 82.35 ± 0.38 82.13 ± 2.14 act+pm+dc 84.76 ± 2.24 86.51 ± 2.30 

ALL 80.43 ± 4.19 87.79 ± 0.57 

Table 13: Centralized Modality Ablation on UTD-MHAD (5-seed). 

Modalities Baseline MoE (%) MAPPO MoE (%) 

skeleton 75.67 ± 0.58 76.00 ± 0.33 

inertial 86.28 ± 0.71 87.21 ± 0.93 

joint_vel 71.67 ± 0.62 70.84 ± 0.84 inertial + skeleton 91.91 ± 0.86 94.19 ± 2.28 

skeleton + joint_vel 80.88 ± 0.79 81.91 ± 1.02 

inertial + joint_vel 91.81 ± 0.91 93.21 ± 1.40 

ALL 93.40 ± 0.74 95.35 ± 1.95 

Table 13 presents the 5-seed centralized modality ablation on UTD-MHAD. Among individual modalities, the inertial sensor achieves the highest accuracy ( 86 .28% ± 0.71 ), outperforming skeleton ( 75 .67% ± 0.58 ) and joint velocity (71 .67% ± 0.62 ). Combining modalities consistently improves performance, with the inertial+skeleton pair reaching 

91 .91% ± 0.86 , while using all three modalities achieves the highest Baseline MoE accuracy of 93 .40% ± 0.74 .MAPPO further improves performance in six of the seven settings, with the largest gains observed for inertial+skeleton (91 .91% → 94 .19% , +2.28%) and the full-modality configuration ( 93 .40% → 95 .35% , +1.95%). The only perfor-mance drop occurs for the joint velocity-only setting, where cross-modal coordination is absent. Overall, these results demonstrate that MAPPO is most effective in multi-modal scenarios, where adaptive expert weighting can better exploit complementary information, albeit with a slight increase in variance across seeds. 

## 9 Error Analysis 

Fig. 12 represents the normalized confusion matrices of Baseline MoE and MAPPO-MoE on the UTD MHAD dataset. The confusion matrices highlight the class-wise recognition performance of the two models and the impact of adaptive modality fusion on reducing inter-class confusion. Both models achieve high recognition accuracy on UTD-MHAD, with most activities concentrated along the diagonal, indicating strong classification performance. The remaining errors are primarily confined to kinematically similar actions such as catch, knock, throw, bowling, and tennis swing, where 24 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 

Figure 12: Confusion matrices of Baseline MoE and MAPPO-MoE on the UTD MHAD Dataset 

Figure 13: Confusion matrices of Baseline MoE and MAPPO-MoE on the UTD MHAD Dataset subtle motion differences make discrimination more challenging. The proposed MAPPO-MoE slightly reduces these residual confusions, particularly for sports-related actions, resulting in improvements in both accuracy (95.58% to 96.05%) and weighted F1-score (95.49% to 95.88%). The sharper diagonal structure of the MAPPO-MoE confusion matrix suggests that adaptive modality weighting produces more discriminative feature representations, leading to more reliable recognition of challenging activities. Fig. 13 shows the 18 total misclassifications, broken down by true class and predicted class. Catch accounts for the most errors ( 7 of 18 ), spread across five different predicted classes. Draw triangle ’s 4 errors are entirely confused with 

Draw circle (CCW) , and Knock ’s 4 errors are mostly confused with Clap (3 of 4), both plausibly due to kinematic similarity between the action pairs. Throw (2 errors) and Tennis-swing (1 error) contribute minor, isolated confusions. This concentrated, explainable error pattern is consistent with the model’s high overall accuracy and F1-score ( 95 .81% 

and 95 .88% ). 

## 10 Conclusion and Future Work 

In this work, we presented a two-part framework for cost-aware, adaptive multimodal fusion in human activity recognition, addressing a limitation shared by conventional fusion methods: the assumption that all sensor modalities carry equal, time-invariant importance, regardless of their acquisition cost or per-sample reliability. In the centralized 25 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 setting, we formulated multimodal fusion as a cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning problem, in which a PPO-based agent per modality learns a per-sample fusion weight, enabling the Mixture-of-Experts network to dynamically emphasize informative sensors while down-weighting costlier ones whenever cheaper modalities already provide sufficient information. Extending this idea to the federated setting, we introduced BiFL-PPO, a bidirectional federated optimization strategy in which a server-side PPO policy learns client-specific trust weights that are fed back to clients to jointly guide server-side aggregation and client-side local optimization, rather than treating these as independent decisions. Evaluated on the MEx Rehabilitation and UTD-MHAD datasets, our centralized MARL-based framework achieved 

87 .30% and 94 .98% classification accuracy respectively, outperforming conventional fixed-weight fusion and existing HAR baselines, while our federated FedMHAR framework achieved 79 .74% and 77 .49% accuracy, consistently surpassing FedAvg, FedProx, FedBN, FedNova, and AdaFedProx. Beyond raw accuracy, our federated results show that the proposed bidirectional trust-weighting strategy provides a consistent, positive gain when layered on top of every one of these baseline methods individually, rather than acting as a replacement for their existing heterogeneity-handling mechanisms, indicating that adaptive, learned aggregation and each method’s own local optimization strategy (proximal regularization, update normalization, local batch-normalization) address complementary aspects of federated heterogeneity rather than competing solutions to the same problem. These results support our central claim: treating sensor trust and client trust as learned, context-dependent decisions, rather than fixed a priori assumptions, yields consistent improvements in both accuracy and training stability across two datasets, two learning paradigms (centralized and federated), and five distinct federated baselines, while additionally reducing reliance on costlier sensor modalities where cheaper alternatives suffice. We view this as evidence that reinforcement-learning-based trust and cost modeling is a viable, general-purpose mechanism for multimodal and federated HAR systems more broadly, rather than one narrowly tuned to a specific fusion architecture or aggregation rule. Limitations of this work point toward natural directions for future research. Our centralized modality-weighting experiments (Section) show that learned weighting provides the clearest benefit when there is genuine, exploitable heterogeneity across modalities or clients to detect; evaluating our framework under deliberately induced sensor degradation or corruption, rather than clean, well-controlled inputs, would more directly test the cost-aware and reliability-aware aspects of our design. Additionally, while we evaluate against five representative federated baselines, extending this comparison to include recently proposed reinforcement-learning-based federated methods, and validating BiFL-PPO’s per-round reward design under a larger number of clients and communication rounds, remain important directions for establishing the broader generality of our approach. 

## Conflict of interest statement 

There is no conflict of interest among the authors of this manuscript. 

## Data availability statement 

The datasets used in this study, namely the MEx and UTD-MHAD datasets, are publicly available open-source datasets and can be accessed from their respective original sources. 

## Funding 

The research work of Debasmita Dey is supported by the Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF), India, through the National Post-Doctoral Fellowship (NPDF) project grant, administered by the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata (Project No. PDF/2026/002233 ). 

## References 

[1] Tasweer Ahmad, Lianwen Jin, Xin Zhang, Songxuan Lai, Guozhi Tang, and Luojun Lin. Graph convolutional neu-ral network for human action recognition: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence ,2(2):128–145, 2021. [2] Jubil T Sunny, Sonia Mary George, Jubilant J Kizhakkethottam, Jubil T Sunny, Sonia Mary George, and Jubilant J Kizhakkethottam. Applications and challenges of human activity recognition using sensors in a smart environment. 

IJIRST Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Technol , 2:50–57, 2015. 26 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 [3] Xiaoshan Yang, Baochen Xiong, Yi Huang, and Changsheng Xu. Cross-modal federated human activity recogni-tion. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(8):5345–5361, 2024. [4] Charikleia Chatzaki, Matthew Pediaditis, George Vavoulas, and Manolis Tsiknakis. Human daily activity and fall recognition using a smartphone’s acceleration sensor. In International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Ageing Well and e-Health , pages 100–118. Springer, 2016. [5] Shaohua Wan, Lianyong Qi, Xiaolong Xu, Chao Tong, and Zonghua Gu. Deep learning models for real-time human activity recognition with smartphones. Mobile Networks and Applications , 25(2):743–755, 2020. [6] Debraj De, Pratool Bharti, Sajal K Das, and Sriram Chellappan. Multimodal wearable sensing for fine-grained activity recognition in healthcare. IEEE Internet Computing , 19(5):26–35, 2015. [7] Samee Ullah Khan, Maryam Sultana, Sufyan Danish, Deepak Gupta, Norah Saleh Alghamdi, Suchang Woo, Dong-Gyu Lee, and Sangtae Ahn. Multimodal feature fusion for human activity recognition using human centric temporal transformer. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , 160:111844, 2025. [8] Asmit Bandyopadhyay, Rohit Basu, Tanmay Sen, and Swagatam Das. Mharfedllm: Multimodal human activity recognition using federated large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01701 , 2025. [9] Labani Halder, Tanmay Sen, and Sarbani Palit. Gramfeddhar: Graph based multimodal differentially private federated har. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05671 , 2025. [10] Kun Xia, Jianguang Huang, and Hanyu Wang. Lstm-cnn architecture for human activity recognition. Ieee Access ,8:56855–56866, 2020. [11] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction , volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. [12] Weilin Cai, Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jing Tang, Sunghun Kim, and Jiayi Huang. A survey on mixture of experts. 

Authorea Preprints , 2024. [13] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 1273–1282. Pmlr, 2017. [14] Jing Wang, Mohammad Tabrez Quasim, and Bo Yi. Privacy-preserving heterogeneous multi-modal sensor data fusion via federated learning for smart healthcare. Information Fusion , 120:103084, 2025. [15] Pranjal Kumar, Siddhartha Chauhan, and Lalit Kumar Awasthi. Human activity recognition (har) using deep learn-ing: Review, methodologies, progress and future research directions: P. kumar et al. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering , 31(1):179–219, 2024. [16] Neha Gupta, Suneet K Gupta, Rajesh K Pathak, Vanita Jain, Parisa Rashidi, and Jasjit S Suri. Human activity recognition in artificial intelligence framework: a narrative review. Artificial intelligence review , 55(6):4755–4808, 2022. [17] Haotian Zhou, Xiujun Zhang, Yu Feng, Tongda Zhang, and Lijuan Xiong. Efficient human activity recognition on edge devices using deepconv lstm architectures. Scientific Reports , 15(1):13830, 2025. [18] Md Milon Islam, Sheikh Nooruddin, and Fakhri Karray. Multimodal human activity recognition for smart healthcare applications. In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) , pages 196–203. IEEE, 2022. [19] Jiale Wang, Xiangnan Cai, Xinyi Dai, Ming Xia, Chuang Shi, and Wu Chen. Multimodal fusion-based human action recognition using wi-fi csi and smartwatch sensors. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2026. [20] Saeedeh Javadi, Daniele Riboni, Luigi Borzì, and Samaneh Zolfaghari. Graph-based methods for multimodal indoor activity recognition: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems ,12(5):3728–3746, 2025. [21] Xiaokang Zhou, Wei Liang, I Kevin, Kai Wang, Hao Wang, Laurence T Yang, and Qun Jin. Deep-learning-enhanced human activity recognition for internet of healthcare things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 7(7):6429– 6438, 2020. [22] Yansong Tang, Yi Tian, Jiwen Lu, Peiyang Li, and Jie Zhou. Deep progressive reinforcement learning for skeleton-based action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pages 5323–5332, 2018. [23] Wenhao Wu, Dongliang He, Xiao Tan, Shifeng Chen, and Shilei Wen. Multi-agent reinforcement learning based frame sampling for effective untrimmed video recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 6222–6231, 2019. 27 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 [24] Wenkai Dong, Zhaoxiang Zhang, and Tieniu Tan. Attention-aware sampling via deep reinforcement learning for action recognition. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 33, pages 8247–8254, 2019. [25] Zheyuan Xu, Yingfu Wang, Jiaqin Jiang, Jian Yao, and Liang Li. Adaptive feature selection with reinforcement learning for skeleton-based action recognition. IEEE Access , 8:213038–213051, 2020. [26] Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and systems , 2:429–450, 2020. [27] Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:7611– 7623, 2020. [28] Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui Jiang, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. Fedbn: Federated learning on non-iid features via local batch normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07623 , 2021. [29] Pranab Sahoo, Ashutosh Tripathi, Sriparna Saha, Samrat Mondal, Jyoti Prakash Singh, and Bhisham Sharma. Adafedprox: A heterogeneity-aware federated deep reinforcement learning for medical image classification. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics , 71(1):1432–1441, 2024. [30] Bin Lin, Zhenyu Tang, Yang Ye, Jinfa Huang, Junwu Zhang, Yatian Pang, Peng Jin, Munan Ning, Jiebo Luo, and Li Yuan. Moe-llava: Mixture of experts for large vision-language models. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia ,2026. [31] Jingnan Gao, Zhe Wang, Xianze Fang, Xingyu Ren, Zhuo Chen, Shengqi Liu, Yuhao Cheng, Jiangjing Lyu, Xiaokang Yang, and Yichao Yan. More: 3d visual geometry reconstruction meets mixture-of-experts. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14680–14691, 2026. [32] Yan Wang, Xin Wang, Hongmei Yang, Yingrui Geng, Hongnian Yu, Ge Zheng, and Liang Liao. Mhagnn: A novel framework for wearable sensor-based human activity recognition combining multi-head attention and graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , 72:1–14, 2023. [33] Zhenjie Yang, Yilin Chai, Xiaosong Jia, Qifeng Li, Yuqian Shao, Xuekai Zhu, Haisheng Su, and Junchi Yan. Drivemoe: Mixture-of-experts for vision-language-action model in end-to-end autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10678–10688, 2026. [34] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [35] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:24611–24624, 2022. [36] Robert A Jacobs, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of local experts. 

Neural computation , 3(1):79–87, 1991. [37] Anjana Wijekoon, Nirmalie Wiratunga, and Kay Cooper. Mex: Multi-modal exercises dataset for human activity recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08992 , 2019. [38] Chen Chen, Roozbeh Jafari, and Nasser Kehtarnavaz. Utd-mhad: A multimodal dataset for human action recognition utilizing a depth camera and a wearable inertial sensor. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 168–172, 2015. [39] Mohammed AA Al-qaness, Abdelghani Dahou, Nafissa Toureche Trouba, Mohamed Abd Elaziz, and Ahmed M Helmi. Tcn-inception: temporal convolutional network and inception modules for sensor-based human activity recognition. Future Generation Computer Systems , 160:375–388, 2024. [40] Sannara Ek, François Portet, and Philippe Lalanda. Transformer-based models to deal with heterogeneous environments in human activity recognition. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing , 27(6):2267–2280, 2023. 28 A PREPRINT - S EPTEMBER 29, 2026 Table 8: Confusion Matrix and Per-Class Metrics for MAPPO MoE (UTD-MHAD) 

> True  \ Pred  Swipe l.  Swipe r.  Wave  Clap  Throw  Arm cro.  Basketb.  Draw X  Draw ci.  Draw ci.  Draw tr.  Bowling  Boxing  Basebal.  Tennis .  Arm curl  Tennis .  Push  Knock  Catch  Pickup .  Jog  Walk  Sit to .  Stand t.  Lunge  Squat  Prec.  Rec.  F1 Swipe l.  16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.89  1.00  0.94
> Swipe r.  0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.89  1.00  0.94
> Wave  0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.94  1.00  0.97
> Clap  0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.84  1.00  0.91
> Throw  0 0 0 0 14  0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  0.88  0.93
> Arm cro.  0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Basketb.  0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Draw X  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.89  1.00  0.94
> Draw ci.  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Draw ci.  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.80  1.00  0.89
> Draw tr.  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 12  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  0.75  0.86
> Bowling  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Boxing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Basebal.  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Tennis .  1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  0.94  0.97
> Arm curl  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Tennis .  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Push  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.84  1.00  0.91
> Knock  0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.92  0.75  0.83
> Catch  1 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  0.56  0.72
> Pickup .  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Jog  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Walk  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15  0 0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Sit to .  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Stand t.  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Lunge  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16  0 1.00  1.00  1.00
> Squat  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15  1.00  1.00  1.00

29