Title: 21078_Wonder_Wins_Ways_Curiosi.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=1fOGTbO5Sx

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Wonder Wins Ways: Curiosity-Driven Exploration through Multi-Agent Contextual Calibration 

Yiyuan Pan Zhe Liu ∗ Hesheng Wang ∗

Shanghai Jiao Tong University {pyy030406, liuzhesjtu, wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn 

# Abstract 

Autonomous exploration in complex multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) with sparse rewards critically depends on providing agents with effective intrinsic motivation. While artificial curiosity offers a powerful self-supervised signal, it often confuses environmental stochasticity with meaningful novelty. Moreover, existing curiosity mechanisms exhibit a uniform novelty bias, treating all unex-pected observations equally. However, peer behavior novelty, which encode latent task dynamics, are often overlooked, resulting in suboptimal exploration in de-centralized, communication-free MARL settings. To this end, inspired by how human children adaptively calibrate their own exploratory behaviors via observ-ing peers, we propose a novel approach to enhance multi-agent exploration. We introduce C ERMIC , a principled framework that empowers agents to robustly fil-ter noisy surprise signals and guide exploration by dynamically calibrating their intrinsic curiosity with inferred multi-agent context. Additionally, C ERMIC gener-ates theoretically-grounded intrinsic rewards, encouraging agents to explore state transitions with high information gain. We evaluate C ERMIC on benchmark suites including VMAS , Meltingpot , and SMACv2 . Empirical results demonstrate that exploration with C ERMIC significantly outperforms SoTA algorithms in sparse-reward environments. 

Code: https://github.com/PyyWill/CERMIC 

# 1 Introduction 

Achieving effective exploration in complex Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) settings, particularly those characterized by sparse rewards and partial observability, remains a formidable scientific challenge [ 7, 43 ]. Intrinsic motivation, instantiated as artificial curiosity, has emerged as a key ingredient for unlocking autonomous learning by providing self-supervised signals in the absence of immediate extrinsic feedback [ 29 , 38 ]. This internal drive enables agents to acquire skills and knowledge that support robust, adaptive intelligence. However, such novelty-seeking algorithms is susceptible to the stochastic environment dynamics or other unlearnable noises (the “ Noisy-TV ” problem) [ 23 ]. Existing algorithms mitigate this chal-lenge through uncertainty quantification or by exploiting global information in multi-agent systems. However, these strategies prove insufficient for intelligent agents, particularly heterogeneous ones or those in large-scale systems: Firstly , such agents frequently encounter severe partial observability, rendering inaccurate uncertainty estimates due to insufficient replay experiences [ 20 ]; Secondly , in decentralized execution without effective communication, agents struggle to form accurate beliefs 

> ∗

Corresponding authors. The authors are with the School of Automation and Intelligent Sensing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, the Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing, Ministry of Education of China, Shanghai 200240. Zhe Liu is also with the National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University. 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). about others’ latent states, undermining methods that presuppose shared inter-agent information. [ 13 ]. Altogether, these limitations highlight a critical need for exploration mechanisms that are robust to partial observable and communication-less environments. Insights from human cognitive development suggest a pathway forward: children rapidly adapt to new social games not only through solo trial-and-error, but also by observing peers, inferring intentions, and selectively imitating successful strategies [ 42 , 16 ]. Such form of social learning, often driven by an innate curiosity about ‘why’ others act as they do, allows for swift coordination and an understanding of task dynamics, even without complete information or explicit instruction [ 21 , 30 ]. Naturally, the success of this human-centric learning process motivates translating its core principles to Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). Therefore, this paper seeks to answer: 

How can robust, context-aware calibration of intrinsic curiosity unlock truly autonomous and effective exploration for MARL agents in challenging real-world settings? 

To this end, we propose Curiosity Enhancement via Robust Multi-Agent Intention Calibration (C ERMIC ), a modular, plug-and-play component designed to augment existing MARL exploration algorithms. Based on the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle [ 41 , 40 ], C ERMIC learns a multi-agent contextualized exploratory representation that steers exploration toward semantically meaningful novelty, and filters unpredictable and spurious novelty. Specifically, it incorporates a graph-based module to model the inferred intentions of surrounding agents and use the context to calibrate raw individual curiosity signal at a given coverage level. At each episode, C ERMIC yields a loss for self-training and a theoretically-grounded intrinsic reward for exploration. We empirically validate CERMIC by integrating it with various MARL algorithms and evaluating its performance across challenging benchmark suites. In summary, our contributions are threefold: • We introduce C ERMIC , a novel framework that empowers MARL agents with socially con-textualized curiosity. Inspired by developmental psychology, this offers a novel perspective on the crucial challenges of effective exploration in sparse-reward settings. • We propose a robust and controllable multi-agent calibration mechanism in challenging partially observable and communication-limited environments. C ERMIC allows for adap-tive tuning based on the learned reliability of the intention graph, effectively dampening exploration instability often plaguing vanilla novelty-seeking agents. • We deliver C ERMIC as a lightweight, readily integrable module and demonstrate consistent gains over strong baselines across standard benchmarks under sparse rewards. 

# 2 Related Work 

Naïve Exploration in RL. Early exploration strategies in reinforcement learning (RL), such as 

ϵ-greedy or Boltzmann exploration, gained popularity due to their simplicity and ease of integration into various algorithms [ 25 , 35 , 10 ]. However, these “naive” exploration methods often perform suboptimally, particularly in challenging scenarios characterized by sparse rewards or deceptive local optima. Effectively, the agent explores by taking largely random sequences of actions, which, especially in continuous state and action spaces, makes comprehensive coverage exceptionally difficult. Even in the foundational setting of multi-armed bandits (MAB) in continuous spaces [ 6], more theoretically sound yet still model-free exploration strategies like Thompson Sampling (TS), Upper-Confidence Bound methods, and Information-Directed Sampling (IDS) have been developed [ 37 , 33 , 11 ]. However, while these methods offer improvements over purely random approaches, their efficacy remains limited when progress requires discovering semantically meaningful novelty far from the agent’s initial experience distribution. This motivates the development of intrinsic reward that can provide more targeted and adaptive exploration signals. 

Curiosity-Driven Exploration Intrinsic rewards are a powerful tool for driving exploration in RL, especially in sparse-reward single-agent tasks [ 29 , 4]. Early methods often quantified novelty via visitation metrics like pseudo-counts or hashing. Subsequent approaches broadened this by measuring surprise through prediction errors (of transitions or features), state marginal matching, uncertainty estimates, or even TD errors from random reward predictors [ 18 , 32 ]. Then, multi-agent exploration, however, presents unique inter-agent dynamics requiring tailored intrinsic rewards. Some works have explored inter-agent observational novelty or influence over others’ transitions/values 2[44]. Others have investigated shared intrinsic signals (e.g., summed local Q-errors) or information-theoretic objectives like maximizing trajectory-latent mutual information for behavioral diversity[ 27 ]. Techniques such as goal-based methods with dimension or observation-space goal selection also aim to manage state space complexity [ 12 , 22 ]. However, many multi-agent intrinsic rewards implicitly rely on centralized training signals, privileged communication, or access to global state—assumptions that break down under decentralized execution. In addition, severe partial observability and heterogeneous policies can mis-calibrate uncertainty-based novelty estimates, while curiosity mechanisms that treat all unexpected events uniformly tend to amplify spurious novelty and overlook socially informative cues encoded in peers’ behaviors. To address these shortcomings, we propose C ERMIC , a novel framework for robustly calibrating intrinsic curiosity via learned models of inferred inter-agent intentions. 

# 3 Background 

Problem Setup. We consider a MAS operating within a communication-less, partially observ-able Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [ 5]. Formally, the environment is described by a tuple 

(O, A, P, R, N, γ ). At each timestep t, each agent i ∈ N receives a local observation oit ∈ O and select an action ait ∈ A via decentralized policies, which induces a state transition. All the agents receive a shared extrinsic rewards ret ∈ R after executing the joint action. In this paper, we focus on the individual agent and omit index i throughout; We use uppercase letters to denote random variables and lowercase letters to denote their realizations. 

Preliminary. The Information Bottleneck (IB) principle [ 2 , 17 ] guides the learning of a compressed representation Z of an input X that maximally preserves information about a target Y . This is achieved by optimizing the trade-off: 

max I(Z; Y ) − αI (X; Z)

where I(·; ·) denotes mutual information. The first term, I(Z; Y ), measures how much information the representation Z contains about the target variable Y , ensuring that Z preserves the relevant predictive information for Y ; The second term, I(X; Z), quantifies the amount of information that Z

retains about the original input X, compelling Z to be a succinct summary of X. In our work, the IB principle serves as a foundational concept. 

Method Overview. CERMIC processes transition experiences (st, a t, s t+1 , r et−1) to generate intrin-sic rewards and guide exploration, where state embeddings st and st+1 are obtained from observations 

ot and ot+1 using encoders with the same structures. To ensure stable representation learning, the parameters of ot+1 ’s encoder ( θm) is updated via a momentum moving of ot’s ones ( θ). The core of CERMIC is to learn a latent representation xt, parameterized as a Gaussian distribution conditioned on the current state-action pair: xt ∼ gϕ(st, a t). Following the IB principle, C ERMIC seeks to maxi-mize mutual information I(Xt; St+1 ) to retain predictive information of novel states and encourage 

exploration , while minimizing I(Xt; [ St, A t]) to exploit information about the current context and gain a compressed representation. The compression process min I(Xt; [ St, A t]) incorporates robust calibration mechanisms leveraging multi-agent context. The overall objective is formulated as Eq. (1): 

max I(Xt; St+1 ) − αI (Xt; [ St, A t]) (1) where α is a Lagrange multiplier. In what follows, this work tries to address two key questions: (i) 

How is CERMIC trained (Section 4.3)? (ii) How does CERMIC generate intrinsic rewards to drive exploration (Section 4.4)? 

# 4 Method 

4.1 Novelty-Driven Exploration 

To drive exploration, we aim to maximize the mutual information I(St+1 ; Xt). However, direct optimization is intractable. Instead, we resort to maximizing a tractable variational lower bound. 

I(Xt; St+1 ) = Ep(xt,s t+1 )



log pϕ(st+1 |xt)

p(st+1 )



+ DKL [p(st+1 |xt)∥pϕ(st+1 |xt)] 

≥ Ep(xt,s t+1 )[log pϕ(st+1 |xt)] + H(St+1 )

(2) 3Figure 1: Workflow of C ERMIC . ( Left ) Illustrates C ERMIC ’s per-timestep objective. ( Right ) Depicts the network architecture. By projecting the raw observation ot into a lower-dimensional embedding 

st, subsequent computations within C ERMIC operate on compact representations, contributing to its overall computational efficiency. where pϕ(st+1 |xt) is a variational encoder parameterized by ϕ to approximate the unknown true conditional distribution p(st+1 |xt). Then, by the non-negativity of the KL-divergence, we obtain the second line expression. Since the entropy of the true next state distribution H(St+1 ) is independent of the model parameters ϕ, it’s equivalent to discard this term. Thus, the exploration objective simplifies to maximizing a log-likelihood loss under the variational approximation. 

Lexplore ≜ Ep(xt,s t+1 )[log pϕ(st+1 |xt)] (3) 

4.2 Multi-Agent Contextualized Exploitation 

Similarly, to minimize the intractable mutual information I(Xt; [ St, A t]) , we optimize its variational upper bound. Following prior work [ 2 ], we introduce a Gaussian variational approximation q(xt) ∼

N (0 , I) for the intractable marginal distribution p(xt) = R p(xt|st, a t)p(st, a t)ds tda t:

I([ St, A t]; xt) = Ep(st,a t,x t) log p(xt|st, a t)

q(xt) − D KL [p(xt)∥q(xt)] ≤ Ep(st,a t,x t)Ψt. (4) where the inequality holds due to the non-negativity of KL-divergence. For conciseness, let Ψt =log p(xt|st, a t)/q (xt). The mean μΨ and variance ΣΨ of Ψt ∼ P Ψ(μΨ, ΣΨ) can be numerically computed through p(xt|st, a t) and q(xt). However, directly computing the expectation in Eq. (4) remains challenging due to the distribution shift caused by replacing p(xt) and the high-dimensional Monte-Carlo (MC) sampling required [ 36 ]. To address this, we enforce an upper bound ¯c on Ψt to relax the minimization term using a chance constraint: 

Pr (Ψ t ≤ ¯c) ≥ 1 − ϵ, P ∈ P Ψ. (5) Crucially, to imbue this compression process with awareness of other agents in our communication-less MAS setting, we condition the chance constraint on an inferred multi-agent contextual feature, 

f on. This feature f on is encoded from an underlying intention modeling of other agents and the specific architecture of this intention modeling can be varied. In our primary exposition, we exemplify the intention model as a dynamic graph, Gn (additional analyses on the effects of pre-trained intention models and other forms of intention modeling can be found in Section 5.3 and Appendix G). The nodes in Gn encapsulate predictive state representations for each agent, while the edges represent their relative spatial relationships. We maintain a memory queue of the intention modeling over time, and the graph Gn will be advanced to Gn+1 only when other agents are detected by a simple MLP module, ensuring efficient computation under partial observability (the trained MLP can identify and match different agents). The generation of Gn at each step utilizes an attention mechanism over historical intention modeling and current observations. Subsequently, a Graph Neural Network 4(GNN) [ 34 ] processes Gn to yield the contextual feature f on, as detailed in Appendix A. Ultimately, regardless of its precise origin, this inferred context f on is integrated into the chance constraint via distributional robustness: 

inf Pr ∈P Ψcal Pr (Ψ t ≤ ¯c) ≥ 1 − ϵ (6) where 

PΨcal =



(EPr [Ψ t] − μΨ(f on)) 2 Σ−1Ψ ≤ γ1

Pr ∈ P (R) : 

EPr [(Ψ t − μΨ)2] ≤ γ2ΣΨ

 .

Here, γ1 > 0 and γ2 > max {γ1, 1} are constants, and the mean value now is dependent on the feature f on. The first inequality of PΨcal represents the true mean value is within an ellipsoid centered at μΨ(f on) with a bound γ1, while the second one constrains the true variance with a bound γ2. The robustness of the set has been proved using McDiarmid’s inequality [ 8], and the optimal γ1, γ 2 can be correspondingly derived. Next, this robust chance-constraint formulation can then be tractably converted into the following second-order cone loss in Eq. (7) via Cantelli’s inequality [ 26 ] (see Appendix B for proof), resulting in a loss function where β is a constant regarding γ1, γ 2, ϵ . In essence, minimizing this loss promotes exploitation within the defined robust calibration set. 

LUB exploit ≜ ReLU( μΨ(f on) + βpΣΨ − ¯c). (7) To ensure the robustness and stability of the curiosity system in the worst case, a lower bound loss is also applied as follows, transformed from Pr (Ψ t ≥ c) ≥ 1 − ϵ. We can set task-agnostic ¯c and c

after normalizing Ψt.

LLB exploit ≜ ReLU( −μΨ(f on) + βpΣΨ − c). (8) 

Task-Adaptive Calibration. This paragraph details the implementation of the calibration mechanism for the mean parameter μΨ(f on). We formulate the calibrated mean as a network-parameterized function h, regarding the inferred multi-agent context f on, a task-adaptive factor γ, and the original mean μΨ. γ is the mutual information between the inferred intention f on and the preceding context composed of the previous intention f on−1 and the received extrinsic reward ret−1.

μΨ(f on|γ = I([ ret−1, f on−1]; f on)) = h(γf on, μ Ψ) (9) 

γ quantifies the consistency of the inferred intention f on within the task context provided by the reward signal. It enables adaptation during different stages of learning and task execution: (i) 

Learning Progress Adaptation . Early in training, when the intention model f on is inaccurate due to partial observability and limited experience, the resulting low mutual information γ automatically down-weights the influence of these unreliable inferences on the calibration of μΨ; (ii) Task Progress Adaptation . The factor γ also captures the alignment between inferred intentions and the underlying task dynamics (cooperative/adversarial); even if the intention modeling (e.g., predict state) is accurate, failing to comprehend the task context can lead to actions yielding unexpected rewards ret−1 and result in a low γ as well. Yet, the mutual information I([ rt−1, f on−1]; f on) remains intractable. To address this issue, we draw inspiration from contrastive learning, which effectively utilizes negative sampling and acts as a regularizer, preventing collapsed solutions and enhancing the stability of the calibration process. Specifically, we employ the InfoNCE loss [ 39 ] to establish tractable bounds for the mutual information: 

Ic 

> nce

≤ I([ rt−1, f on−1]; f on) ≤ I1−c 

> nce

. (10a) 

Ic 

> nce

≜ Ep(xt,s t+1 )ES − log exp( c([ rt−1, f on−1], f on)) 

P    

> foi∈F −∪fon

exp( c([ rt−1, f on−1], f oi )) . (10b) where c is a score function (implemented as bilinear+softmax in our work) assigning high scores to positive pairs (f on−1, r et−1, f on) and F− denotes the set of negative examples {(f on−1, r et−1, f oj )}|F| 

> j=1

.During learning, the positive samples are generated from the memory module, while the negative ones f oj are computed by adding additional noise to f on. The derivation of these bounds is detailed in Appendix C. For consistency with the inequality directions in the chance constraints, we substitute the left-hand side of Eq. (10a) into Eq. (7), while substituting the right-hand side into Eq. (8). 5Algorithm 1 CERMIC  

> 1:

Initialize: CERMIC and the actor-critic network  

> 2:

for episode j = 1 to M do  

> 3:

for timestep t = 0 to T − 1 do  

> 4:

for each agent n = 0 to N do  

> 5:

Obtain action from the actor at ∼ π(st), then obtain the state st+1 ; 

> 6:

Add (st, a t, s t+1 ) into the on-policy experiences;  

> 7:

Obtain the intrinsic reward rit by Eq. (12) and update ret with rt = rit + ret ; 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Update the actor and critic with the collected on-policy experiences as the input;  

> 11:

Update C ERMIC by gradient descent based on Eq. (11) with the collected on-policy experi-ences;  

> 12:

end for 4.3 Loss Module 

The final loss for training C ERMIC is a combination of the upper and lower bounds established in previous sections. C ERMIC ’s parameters Θ encompass the components illustrated in Fig. 1. Owing to its operation in a low-dimensional space and reliance on inputs that are readily available in standard MARL pipelines, C ERMIC serves as an efficient, plug-and-play module. 

min Θ LC = LUB exploit + LLB exploit − αLexplore . (11) 

4.4 Intrinsic Reward Module 

In this section, we detail how C ERMIC generates intrinsic rewards to foster exploration. Our aim is to not only encourage novelty seeking but also to be theoretically compatible with extrinsic rewards. To this end, drawing inspiration from Bayesian Surprise [24], we formulate the intrinsic reward rit:

rit ≜ DKL (p(Θ |(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∪ D m)∥p(Θ |D m)) 1/2. (12) where Θ represents the parameters of the C ERMIC module and the dataset Dm comprises transition tuples (st, a t, s t+1 ) collected over the past m episodes. Intuitively, this intrinsic reward encourages agents to prioritize the exploration that are maximally informative for optimizing the C ERMIC module itself. In summarize, we show the overall MARL algorithm with C ERMIC in Algorithm 1. 

Theoretical Analysis in Linear MDPs Analyzing dynamics of intrinsic rewards in high-dimensional, non-linear environments presents significant theoretical challenges. However, we provide a theoretical analysis within the framework of linear Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), where the transition kernel and reward model are assumed to be linear (i.e., xt = ωtη(st, at ), where ωt is the C ERMIC 

parameters in linear MDP settings and η is a feature embedding function). Within this well-studied setting, algorithms like LSVI-UCB [ 14 ] are known to achieve near-optimal worst-case regret bounds, largely due to their principled exploration strategy. The exploration bonus in LSVI-UCB, denoted rUCB −DB  

> t

, quantifies the uncertainty in the value estimate for the state-action pair (st, a t) and encourages optimistic exploration. We proved that, Our proposed intrinsic reward rit is closely related to this UCB-DB bonus, as formalized in Theorem 1. 

Theorem 1 Consider a linear MDP setting where the estimation noises of optimal parameters and transition dynamics are assumed to follow standard Gaussian distributions N (0 , I). Then, for any tuning parameter ρ > 0, it holds that 

ρ · rUCB-DB  

> t

≤ rit ≤ √2ρ · rUCB-DB  

> t

. (13) By tracking the UCB-DB bonus, which naturally decays as uncertainty about state-action values diminishes, rit also attenuates over time. This prevents persistent, potentially destabilizing intrinsic motivation when exploration is no longer paramount, facilitating convergence towards policies optimized for extrinsic rewards. While the intrinsic reward may be challenging due to the non-Bayesian parameterization of the C ER - 

> MIC

model, We empirically approximate it with an IB-trained representation and a Gaussian marginal, 6yielding a tractable lower-bound bonus that supports robust exploration in noisy environments as follows: While directly computing ri is challenging, we address this by deriving a computable lower bound using the Data Processing Inequality (DPI), which states that post-processing cannot increase infor-mation. Applying a learned representation function R(st, a t) (a part of C ERMIC ) to the transition 

(st, a t, S t+1 ), the DPI yields: 

ri(st, a t) = 

h

H (st, a t, s t+1 )|D m

 − H  (st, a t, s t+1 )|Θ, Dm

i1/2

≥

h

H R(st, a t, s t+1 )|D m

 − H  R(st, a t, s t+1 )|Θ, Dm

i1/2

≜ ri

> approx

.

(14) The approximated reward ri 

> approx

thus becomes the KL divergence between the conditional represen-tation R(xt|st, a t) and its marginal pmargin (xt|D m):

ri

> approx

(st, a t) = EΘ [DKL (Rϕ(xt|st, a t)∥pmargin (xt|D m))] 1/2

. (15) The marginal pmargin (xt|D m) over model parameters is intractable. Following common practice in information-theoretic exploration with non-Bayesian models, we approximate pmargin (xt|D m) with a fixed standard Gaussian distribution N (0 , I). This renders Eq. (15) empirically computable. 

# 5 Experiments 

5.1 Task Setup Benchmarks and Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate our approach on a diverse set of MARL bench-marks: VMAS (9 tasks) [ 3], MeltingPot (4 tasks)[ 1], and SMACv2 (2 tasks) [ 9]. All environments were adapted to sparse-reward configurations to rigorously test exploration capabilities; specific modifications and implementation details are provided in Appendix E. Different metrics for each benchmark: (i) mean episodic reward for VMAS , (ii) mean episodic return for MeltingPot , and (iii) mean test win-rate for SMACv2 .

Baselines. We integrate C ERMIC with two widely-used MARL algorithms, M APPO [ 15 ] and Q MIX 

[31 ]. Our approach is compared against three categories of algorithms: (i) Standard MARL baselines: MAPPO , Q MIX . (we also include a naive exploration method M APPO -ϵ GREEDY ) (ii) State-of-the-art MARL methods: CPM [ 19 ] from VMAS and Q MIX -SPECT RA [ 28 ] from SMACv2 . (iii) Other curiosity-driven exploration algorithms: MAPPO-DB [ 2 ], M ACE [13 ], and I CES [20 ]. Crucially, all compared algorithms are required to operate under communication-limited, decentralized execution settings to ensure fair and relevant comparisons. 

5.2 Comparison with State-of-the-Art 

Table 2: Per-agent contributions in Balance* .            

> # Agents 2468MAPPO-DB 12.3 13.7 13.6 12.1 MAPPO -C ERMIC 14.4 16.7 16.4 17.3

We present a comparative performance analysis of C ERMIC -augmented algorithms against various baselines in Table 1. A general observation from these results is that curiosity-driven approaches, on average, tend to outperform traditional MARL methods. Building upon this, C ERMIC consis-tently enhances its base algorithms, achieving new SoTA performance on 12 out of the 16 evaluated scenarios. Furthermore, C ERMIC shows its strongest gains on MeltingPot , where rewards depend on emergent, dynamic inter-agent interactions rather than fixed rules. In such settings, intention-aware exploration and curiosity calibration give a clear advantage over simple novelty seeking. Additionally, Agents driven by single-agent curiosity formulations (e.g., MAPPO-DB), which ignore peers’ intentions, are persistently distracted by others’ behaviors even in later training (see Table 2). Our contextual calibration explicitly addresses this issue by transforming socially induced randomness into a learnable signal. To further validate this, we evaluate how per-agent contributions change with the number of agents in the Balance* task. Results show that MAPPO-DB’s per-agent contribution decreases as agent count increases, while C ERMIC mitigates this degradation: 7Table 1: Performance comparison : against baselines, SoTA, and other curiosity-driven methods. An * indicates environments adapted to sparse-reward configurations; others are originally sparse. Task names omitted (see appendix for details)                                                                

> VMAS MeltingPot SMACv2 Disper Naviga Sampli ∗
> Passag ∗
> Transp ∗
> Balanc ∗
> GiveWa ∗
> Wheel ∗
> Flocki ∗
> StaHun CleaUp ChiGam PriDil pro5v5 ∗
> zer5v5 ∗
> Baseline Methods
> QMIX [32] 0.69 0.65 25.4 154 0.42 48.5 3.40 -2.83 0.55 5.11 71.2 6.83 4.57 0.60 0.39 MAPPO [15] 1.44 1.08 21.8 159 0.23 60.3 3.71 -3.70 -0.37 5.02 74.2 8.44 4.93 0.61 0.44 MAPPO -ϵGREEDY 1.51 1.22 22.8 161 0.27 63.3 3.74 -3.53 -0.12 5.33 74.5 8.62 5.17 0.61 0.43
> Current SoTA
> CPM [19] 1.46 1.25 25.7 162 0.44 61.0 3.73 -2.51 0.20 5.11 74.4 8.35 5.21 0.64 0.44 QMIX -SPECT RA [28] 1.52 1.14 24.2 154 0.47 52.9 3.82 -2.84 0.02 5.75 70.4 8.51 5.17 0.65 0.45
> Curiosity Methods
> MAPPO-DB [2] 1.34 0.88 23.0 155 0.51 55.2 3.82 -2.05 -0.04 5.08 71.2 8.47 4.99 0.63 0.43 MACE [13] 1.48 1.22 28.1 166 0.60 60.0 3.62 -1.62 0.24 6.18 75.2 8.94 5.52 0.67 0.44 QPLEX -I CES [20] 1.56 1.36 25.5 164 0.61 63.2 3.96 -1.44 0.63 7.20 76.7 9.07 5.42 0.74 0.48
> QMIX -C ERMIC (ours) 1.02 0.92 27.2 163 0.84 62.7 3.77 -1.31 0.78 8.43 76.2 8.47 5.02 0.73 0.44
> MAPPO -C ERMIC (ours) 1.57 1.44 25.4 172 0.64 67.3 3.94 -1.47 1.06 7.11 78.3 10.03 6.74 0.70 0.48

Figure 2: Visualization of agent observation embeddings st and latent states xt. ( Left ) Compara-tive st distributions for agents under C ERMIC -augmented vs. baseline algorithms. ( Right ) Influence of curiosity-driven latent states xt on task exploration. 

5.3 Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis Qualitative Analysis. To provide intuitive insights of the operational dynamics, we visualize the temporal evolution of agent states st and their corresponding curiosity latent variables xt (Fig. 2). We define a state trajectory as a temporally contiguous sequence of st embeddings. (i) Curiosity to Peers : The left panel of Fig. 2, which displays these state trajectories, reveals that C ERMIC -augmented agents exhibit more frequent close proximities and intersections in their pathways compared to those under vanilla MAPPO . These convergences, without full trajectory overlap, suggest that agents actively approach others for informed observation to refine their distinct plans, rather than engaging in mere imitation. (ii) Curiosity to Environment : In the right panel, the visualization of latent states offers further compelling evidence. Firstly , xt often displays a more dispersed distribution around the current 

st embedding, reflecting an intrinsic drive towards novel or uncertain aspects of the current state. 

Secondly , these latent states tend to concentrate at the endpoints of the state trajectories, indicat-ing C ERMIC ’s heightened activity prior to significant behavioral shifts, aligning with the original motivation behind designing an intrinsic reward that prioritizes critical transitions. Furthermore ,inter-agent encounters typically trigger a surge in the intrinsic reward, indicating that C ERMIC effec-tively captures and values the increased novelty and learning opportunities presented by these crucial multi-agent contextual shifts. 8Figure 3: The impact of pretrained intention memory module on C ERMIC ’s performances 

Quantitative Analysis. Fig. 3 illustrates the mean episodic return curves on the VMAS task, with comprehensive results across additional tasks deferred to Appendix F. While C ERMIC -augmented algorithms ultimately achieve superior final performance, their learning curves can exhibit a slower initial ramp-up compared to some baselines. We attribute this initial lower sample efficiency to the inherent challenge of learning effective multi-agent intention modeling from scratch, a difficulty induced by severe partial observability. 

5.4 Ablation Study 

We conduct three ablations on C ERMIC , summarized in Table 3: (i) Loss module : Ablating the exploration loss Lexplore markedly impedes adaptation in sparse-reward settings, yielding slower learning; removing the exploitation losses LUB  

> exploit

+ LLB  

> exploit

prevents effective noise filtering, leading to instability and pronounced fluctuations. (ii) α: increasing the curiosity scale α (for our cali-brated intrinsic curiosity) typically lowers immediate returns via greater exploration, yet improves learning stability and reduces performance variance, reflecting an exploration–exploitation trade-off. (iii) Intention model : More expressive intention models that better extract contextual features f on

consistently improve task performance. Table 3: Ablation studies and hyperparameter analysis of C ERMIC .                                                 

> Flocki* Naviga Passag* CleanUp ChiGam
> Loss Ablations ( α= 0 .2)
> w/o Lexplore 0.82 ( ±0.15) 1.41 ( ±0.04) 166 ( ±3.66) 75.4 ( ±1.05) 9.22 ( ±0.80) w/o Lexploit 0.72 ( ±0.48) 1.36 ( ±0.10) 164 ( ±4.41) 71.5 ( ±1.59) 8.47 ( ±1.18) MAPPO-C ERMIC 1.06 ( ±0.12) 1.43 ( ±0.06) 171 ( ±3.72) 78.1 ( ±0.82) 10.02 ( ±0.65)
> Coverage Level α
> 1.0 0.80 ( ±0.07) 1.40 ( ±0.02) 163 ( ±1.56) 71.2 ( ±0.77) 9.04 ( ±0.46) 0.5 0.88 ( ±0.10) 1.42 ( ±0.06) 169 ( ±3.78) 74.6 ( ±0.68) 9.50 ( ±0.67) 0.2 1.06 ( ±0.12) 1.43 ( ±0.06) 171 ( ±3.72) 78.1 ( ±0.82) 10.02 ( ±0.65)
> Memory Type ( α= 0 .2)
> GRU 0.78 ( ±0.27) 1.39 ( ±0.04) 161 ( ±3.15) 75.2 ( ±1.03) 9.19 ( ±0.97) Graph 1.06 ( ±0.12) 1.43 ( ±0.06) 171 ( ±3.72) 78.1 ( ±0.82) 10.02 ( ±0.65)

5.5 Generalization Across Reward Densities 

To validate this and demonstrate C ERMIC ’s potential with proficient intention modeling, we conducted an auxiliary experiment: We use pre-trained agent detection and intention modeling modules to provide more accurate initial estimates of other agents’ states, leading to a C ERMIC variant that exhibited significantly faster convergence. Given advancements in related areas like motion prediction, this result underscores C ERMIC ’s strong applicability. We further investigated the generalization capabilities of agents by evaluating their performance when trained under one reward density (dense or sparse) and tested under a sparse-reward setting. The results are presented in Table 4. A consistent trend observed across all algorithms is a performance degradation when agents trained on dense rewards are deployed in sparse-reward scenarios. However, CERMIC demonstrates a notable ability to mitigate this performance drop. We attribute this to CERMIC ’s capability to enable agents to understand the task by observing other agents, rather than 9solely relying on trial-and-error learning. These findings underscore the importance of research in sparse-reward reinforcement learning and highlight the potential for C ERMIC ’s broad applicability. Table 4: Agent generalization performance on VMAS tasks . ∆ denotes the performance drop from dense-trained to sparse-trained. 

Method Balance ∗ Give Way ∗ Passage ∗

Sparse ↑ Dense ↑ ∆ ↓ Sparse ↑ Dense ↑ ∆ Sparse ↑ Dense ↑ ∆ ↓

CPM 61.0 58.2 -2.8 3.73 3.58 -0.15 162 153 -9 

QPLEX -I CES 63.2 60.7 -2.5 3.96 3.85 -0.11 164 159 -5 

MAPPO -C ERMIC 67.3 65.6 -1.7 3.94 3.82 -0.12 172 168 -4 

# 6 Conclusion 

This paper introduced C ERMIC , a novel plug-and-play module significantly enhancing exploration in communication-limited, partially observable MARL under sparse rewards. C ERMIC ’s core innovation is a multi-agent contextualized calibration of intrinsic curiosity. Grounded in Bayesian Surprise and supported by theoretical guarantees, we also propose a novel intrinsic reward guides this calibrated exploration. Extensive experiments show C ERMIC -augmented algorithms achieve state-of-the-art performance, underscoring the efficacy of context-aware intrinsic motivation. In essence,C ERMIC 

offers a crucial step towards enabling more autonomous and socially intelligent agent teams for real-world deployment. No negative societal impact. 

Limitations and Future Work. Despite its promising results, C ERMIC has limitations that open avenues for future research. First , learning to accurately model other agents’ intentions solely from local observations in communication-less, partially observable settings remains a challenging endeavor. Future work could explore integrating pre-trained components, such as LLMs, to potentially bootstrap or replace aspects of this ad-hoc intention modeling process. Second , our current graph construction and one-step latent transition model may require extensions (e.g., hierarchical latent models) to effectively scale to higher-dimensional or multi-modal MAS tasks. 10 Acknowledgment 

This paper was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62303307, 62225309, U24A20278, 62361166632, U21A20480, and Sponsored by the Oceanic Interdisciplinary Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and in part by National Key Laboratory of Human Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University (No. HMHAI-202408). 

# References 

[1] John P Agapiou, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Edgar A Duéñez-Guzmán, Jayd Matyas, Yi-ran Mao, Peter Sunehag, Raphael Köster, Udari Madhushani, Kavya Kopparapu, Ramona Comanescu, et al. Melting pot 2.0. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13746 , 2022. 7 [2] Chenjia Bai, Lingxiao Wang, Lei Han, Animesh Garg, Jianye Hao, Peng Liu, and Zhaoran Wang. Dynamic bottleneck for robust self-supervised exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17007–17020, 2021. 3, 4, 7, 8 [3] Matteo Bettini, Ryan Kortvelesy, Jan Blumenkamp, and Amanda Prorok. Vmas: A vectorized multi-agent simulator for collective robot learning. In International Symposium on Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems , pages 42–56. Springer, 2022. 7 [4] Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894 , 2018. 2 [5] Anthony R Cassandra. A survey of pomdp applications. In Working notes of AAAI 1998 fall symposium on planning with partially observable Markov decision processes , volume 1724, 1998. 3 [6] Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Aditya Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 844–853. PMLR, 2017. 2 [7] Christian Schroeder De Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 , 2020. 1 [8] Erick Delage and Yinyu Ye. Distributionally robust optimization under moment uncertainty with application to data-driven problems. Operations research , 58(3):595–612, 2010. 5 [9] Benjamin Ellis, Jonathan Cook, Skander Moalla, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mingfei Sun, Anuj Mahajan, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. Smacv2: An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:37567–37593, 2023. 7 [10] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 , 2023. 2 [11] Botao Hao, Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, Zheng Wen, and Guang Cheng. Bootstrapping upper confidence bound. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. 2 [12] Jeewon Jeon, Woojun Kim, Whiyoung Jung, and Youngchul Sung. Maser: Multi-agent rein-forcement learning with subgoals generated from experience replay buffer. In International conference on machine learning , pages 10041–10052. PMLR, 2022. 3 [13] Haobin Jiang, Ziluo Ding, and Zongqing Lu. Settling decentralized multi-agent coordinated exploration by novelty sharing. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 17444–17452, 2024. 2, 7, 8 [14] Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on learning theory , pages 2137– 2143. PMLR, 2020. 6 11 [15] Hongyue Kang, Xiaolin Chang, Jelena Miši´ c, Vojislav B Miši´ c, Junchao Fan, and Yating Liu. Cooperative uav resource allocation and task offloading in hierarchical aerial computing systems: A mappo-based approach. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 10(12):10497–10509, 2023. 7, 8 [16] Kuno Kim, Megumi Sano, Julian De Freitas, Nick Haber, and Daniel Yamins. Active world model learning with progress curiosity. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5306–5315. PMLR, 2020. 2 [17] Youngjin Kim, Wontae Nam, Hyunwoo Kim, Ji-Hoon Kim, and Gunhee Kim. Curiosity-bottleneck: Exploration by distilling task-specific novelty. In International conference on machine learning , pages 3379–3388. PMLR, 2019. 3 [18] Chenghao Li, Tonghan Wang, Chengjie Wu, Qianchuan Zhao, Jun Yang, and Chongjie Zhang. Celebrating diversity in shared multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 34:3991–4002, 2021. 2 [19] Jingchen Li, Yusen Yang, Ziming He, Huarui Wu, Haobin Shi, and Wenbai Chen. Cournot policy model: Rethinking centralized training in multi-agent reinforcement learning. Information Sciences , 677:120983, 2024. 7, 8 [20] Xinran Li, Zifan Liu, Shibo Chen, and Jun Zhang. Individual contributions as intrinsic explo-ration scaffolds for multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18110 , 2024. 1, 7, 8 [21] Emily G Liquin and Tania Lombrozo. Explanation-seeking curiosity in childhood. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 35:14–20, 2020. 2 [22] Iou-Jen Liu, Unnat Jain, Raymond A Yeh, and Alexander Schwing. Cooperative exploration for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning ,pages 6826–6836. PMLR, 2021. 3 [23] Augustine Mavor-Parker, Kimberly Young, Caswell Barry, and Lewis Griffin. How to stay curious while avoiding noisy tvs using aleatoric uncertainty estimation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 15220–15240. PMLR, 2022. 1 [24] Pietro Mazzaglia, Ozan Catal, Tim Verbelen, and Bart Dhoedt. Curiosity-driven exploration via latent bayesian surprise. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 36, pages 7752–7760, 2022. 6 [25] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013. 2 [26] Haruhiko Ogasawara. The multiple cantelli inequalities. Statistical Methods & Applications , 28 (3):495–506, 2019. 5 [27] Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V Albrecht. Benchmark-ing multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07869 , 2020. 3 [28] Hyunwoo Park, Baekryun Seong, and Sang-Ki Ko. Spectra: Scalable multi-agent reinforcement learning with permutation-free networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11726 , 2025. 7, 8 [29] Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2778– 2787. PMLR, 2017. 1, 2 [30] Graham Pluck and Helen L Johnson. Stimulating curiosity to enhance learning. GESJ: Education Sciences and Psychology , 2, 2011. 2 [31] Tabish Rashid, Gregory Farquhar, Bei Peng, and Shimon Whiteson. Weighted qmix: Expanding monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:10199–10210, 2020. 7 12 [32] Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(178):1–51, 2020. 2, 8 [33] Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via information-directed sampling. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. 2 [34] Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks , 20(1):61–80, 2008. 5 [35] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. 2 [36] Alexander Shapiro. Monte carlo sampling methods. Handbooks in operations research and management science , 10:353–425, 2003. 4 [37] Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias W Seeger. Information-theoretic regret bounds for gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting. IEEE transactions on information theory , 58(5):3250–3265, 2012. 2 [38] Bhavya Sukhija, Stelian Coros, Andreas Krause, Pieter Abbeel, and Carmelo Sferrazza. Maxin-forl: Boosting exploration in reinforcement learning through information gain maximization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12098 , 2024. 1 [39] Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What makes for good views for contrastive learning? Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6827–6839, 2020. 5 [40] Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle. In 

2015 ieee information theory workshop (itw) , pages 1–5. Ieee, 2015. 2 [41] Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and William Bialek. The information bottleneck method. 

arXiv preprint physics/0004057 , 2000. 2 [42] Peter Washington, Catalin Voss, Nick Haber, Serena Tanaka, Jena Daniels, Carl Feinstein, Terry Winograd, and Dennis Wall. A wearable social interaction aid for children with autism. In 

Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 2348–2354, 2016. 2 [43] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Tong Zhang, and Tamer Basar. Fully decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning with networked agents. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5872–5881. PMLR, 2018. 1 [44] Lulu Zheng, Jiarui Chen, Jianhao Wang, Jiamin He, Yujing Hu, Yingfeng Chen, Changjie Fan, Yang Gao, and Chongjie Zhang. Episodic multi-agent reinforcement learning with curiosity-driven exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3757–3769, 2021. 313 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: See Abstract and Introduction Section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Conclusion Section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 14 Justification: see Method Section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Method Section, Appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 15 Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Supplementary Material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Experiments Section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. 16 • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Appendix. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: This work conform with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: see Conclusion Section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to 17 generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: [NA] Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: CC-BY 4.0. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? 18 Answer: [Yes] Justification: we include our code/model in the Supplementary Material. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: [NA] Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: [NA] Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] 19 Justification: [NA] Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 A Memory Update Module 

The agent memory update module primarily consists of an agent detection mechanism and a memory encoding structure. In our main approach, this involves an MLP-based agent detector and a graph-based memory module. This section elaborates on the graph structure and the pre-training of the detector. 

A.1 Graph-based Memory Representation 

The graph-based memory module offers a structured approach to model inter-agent states and their relationships. For each observing agent, a local graph Gt = ( Vt, Et) is dynamically constructed or updated at each timestep t.• Nodes ( Vt): Each node vi ∈ V t corresponds to an inferred latent state representation of a specific agent i (either the self-agent or a detected peer). These node features, denoted 

zi ∈ RDnode , are generated by encoding the raw observation associated with agent i.• Edges ( Et): Edges eij ∈ E t link pairs of nodes (vi, v j ), representing the inferred relationship between agent i and agent j. In our work, these are spatial relationships, with edge features 

fij ∈ RDedge derived from their relative positions. This dynamic graph serves as input to a Graph Neural Network (GNN), which processes the relational information to produce a contextualized memory representation for the observing agent, thereby informing its subsequent actions. 

A.2 Pre-training Process 

Key components of the agent memory module are pre-trained to establish meaningful initial represen-tations, facilitating more effective subsequent MARL training. 

MLP Agent Detector. This module processes an agent’s observation to output probabilities 

p = [ p1, . . . , p N ]⊤, where pk denotes the likelihood of observing an agent of type-k. These probabilities are later used to gate memory updates during MARL training via a threshold τdet . Pre-training is supervised using ground-truth presence labels yk ∈ { 0, 1}, which are set to 1 if agent-k

appears within the field of view or one body length of the observer, and 0 otherwise. To facilitate reliable detection, agents in our environment are either designed with or inherently exhibit distinct visual appearances, and each agent type is represented by a dedicated channel in the observation tensor, enabling effective training of an MLP-based detector. 

Ldet = − XNk=1 [yk log( pk) + (1 − yk) log(1 − pk)] . (16) 

Graph Memory Encoders. The node and edge encoders within the graph memory are pre-trained as follows: (i) Node Encoder : for an observing agent k, its encoder produces a feature zk→j representing its understanding of another agent j’s state. This is trained to predict agent j’s true latent state sj . The MSE loss is weighted by a detection mask, which is derived from the predicted transition probabilities 

pk→j produced by a pre-trained detector, using a fixed threshold to determine valid entries; (ii) Edge Encoder : this encoder generates 2D edge features fij from inter-agent cues, trained to directly predict the true relative position vector (∆ xij , ∆yij ) between agents i and j using an MSE loss. 

(

L(k) 

> node

= P  

> j̸=k

pk→j · E || zk→j − sj || 2 .

Ledge = E || fij − (∆ xij , ∆yij )|| 2 . (17) These pre-training steps provide the memory module with an initial capacity for relevant information extraction, potentially accelerating overall learning. 

# B Derivation with Cantelli Inequality 

In this section, we detail the transformation of the distributionally robust chance constraint, Eq.(6) of the main paper. This transformation leverages Cantelli’s inequality to arrive at a tractable loss 21 under second-order cone program (SOCP) constraint. In this section, we set ¯c = 1 for illustration. We begin by defining auxiliary variables based on the quantities in the chance constraint: 

˜s = Ψ t − μΨ(f on) (18a) 

b = 1 − μΨ(f on) (18b) We also define the set S describing the ambiguity in the first and second moments of ˜s, and the set 

D˜s of distributions consistent with these moments: 

S =

n

(μ1, σ 1) : |μ1| ≤ pγ1ΣΨ, μ 21 + σ21 ≤ γ2ΣΨ

o

(19a) 

D˜s =



Pr ∈ P (R) : |EPr [˜ s]| ≤ √γ1ΣΨ

EPr [˜ s2] ≤ γ2ΣΨ



(19b) where P(R) is the set of all probability distributions on R. Then, the original chance constraint 

inf Pr ∈P cal Pr (Ψ t ≤ 1) ≥ 1 − ϵ can be rewritten using ˜s and b. The infimum term is: 

inf  

> Pr∈P cal

Pr (Ψ t ≤ 1) = inf  

> Pr∈D ˜s

Pr (˜ s ≤ b)= inf  

> (μ1,σ 1)∈S

inf   

> Pr∈P (μ1,σ 21)

Pr (˜ s ≤ b). (20) where Pcal refers to the set of distributions under multi-agent contextual intention uncertainty in the main paper. To this end, Eq. (20) formulates the problem as a bi-level optimization. The outer layer finds the worst-case mean μ1 and variance σ21 within the ambiguity set S. The inner layer finds the worst-case probability Pr (˜ s ≤ b) for a given mean and variance. To solve the inner optimization problem, we employ the one-sided Cantelli’s inequality. For a random variable X with mean E[X] and variance Var [X] = σ2, Cantelli’s inequality provides bounds on tail probabilities. Specifically, for the lower tail, the bound is defined as: 

Pr (X − E(X) ≥ − λ) ≤ σ2

σ2 + λ2

Applying this to our inner problem inf Pr ∈P (μ1,σ 21 ) Pr (˜ s ≤ b), we get: 

inf   

> Pr∈P (μ1,σ 21)

Pr (˜ s ≤ b) = 

( (b−μ1)2  

> σ21+( b−μ1)2

, if b ≥ μ1

0, otherwise. (21) In practical multi-agent reinforcement learning scenarios, the desired confidence level 1 − ϵ is positive. For the chance constraint inf Pr (˜ s ≤ b) ≥ 1 − ϵ to hold with 1 − ϵ > 0, we must be in the regime where b ≥ μ1. If b < μ 1, the infimum probability would be 0, violating the constraint. Therefore, for any relevant (μ1, σ 1) ∈ S, the condition b ≥ μ1 must be satisfied. This implies 

b ≥ sup (μ1,σ 1)∈S μ1 = √γ1Σh (assuming Σh > 0). Consequently, Eq. (20) simplifies to: 

inf  

> Pr∈P cal

Pr (Ψ t ≤ 1) = inf 

> (μ1,σ 1)∈S

(b − μ1)2

σ21 + ( b − μ1)2 (22) Solving the optimization problem in Eq. (22) over the set S (defined by moment bounds |μ1| ≤ √γ1Σh and μ21 + σ21 ≤ γ2Σh) yields the following worst-case probability: 

inf  

> Pr∈P cal

Pr (Ψ t ≤ 1) = 

 

> 1√γ2−γ1
> b/ √Σh−√γ1
> 2
> +1

, if √γ1 ≤ b√ΣΨ

≤ γ2 

> √γ1
> (b/ √Σh)2−γ2
> (b/ √Σh)2

, if b√ΣΨ

> γ2

> √γ1

infeasible , if b√ΣΨ

< √γ1.

The chance constraint requires this infimum probability to be at least 1 − ϵ: inf Pr ∈P cal Pr (Ψ t ≤ 1) ≥

1 − ϵ. By substituting the expressions above and performing algebraic manipulations, we arrive at the tractable second-order cone constraint. Substituting b = 1 − Ψt(f on), the condition becomes: 

μΨ(f on) + βpΣΨ ≤ 1 (23a) 

ln =

(√γ1 +

q 1−ϵϵ (γ2 − γ1), if γ1/γ 2 ≤ ϵ ≤ 1

p γ2 

> ϵ

, if 0 < ϵ < γ 1/γ 2. (23b) 22 This provides the final tractable form for the first inequality in Eq. (6) of the main paper. For this second-order cone constraint, we wrap it with a ReLU function to construct the following loss 

LUB exploit , which forms an upper bound of the exploit loss. We substitute ¯c to recover the Eq. (7) presented in the main text. To ensure stability and prevent variables Ψt from shrinking indefinitely, we also impose a lower-bound constraint Pr (Ψ t ≥ c) ≥ 1 − ϵ, which can be converted into loss LLB exploit in a similar manner. 

# C InfoNCE Bounds on Mutual Information 

This appendix details how the InfoNCE objective provides lower and upper bounds for the mutual information I([ ret−1, f on−1]; f on). We begin our derivation by establishing the lower bound relationship 

Ince (c) ≤ I([ ret−1, f on−1]; f on). For notational simplicity, we denote the context [ret−1, f on−1] as zn.In our work, the InfoNCE objective is defined using a critic function c([ ret−1, f on−1], f on), which measures the compatibility between the context [ret−1, f on−1] and the current inferred intention f on.In practice, c(·, ·) is implemented as a bilinear layer followed by a softmax, yielding scores in the range [0 , 1] . Given a positive pair (f on, z n) drawn from the joint distribution p(zn, f on), and a set of 

N negative samples F− = {f −o,j n }Nj=1 drawn from the complement of f on in its state space F, the InfoNCE objective is defined as: 

Ic 

> nce

≜ Ep(zn,f on)EF−

"

log exp( c(zn, f on)) 

PNj=1 exp( c(zn, f −o,j n )) 

#

. (24) 

where the positive pairs (zn, f on) are obtained from the current prediction pair. Negative samples are generated by independently sampling N times from the state space of f on. Let I be an indicator variable, with I = 1 indicating a positive sample randomly drawn from the state space, and I = 0 

indicating a negative one (i.e., f on is replaced by f −on ). The corresponding conditional probabilities have the following properties:  p(zn, f on|I = 1) = p(zn, f on).p(zn, f −on |I = 0) = p(zn)p(f on). (25) We aim to maximize the InfoNCE objective Ic

> nce

. We assume that the optimal critic c∗ can identify the log-posterior probability of a randomly sampled pair being the positive one. Thus, we have: 

Ic 

> nce

≤ Ic∗

> nce

≤ Ep(zn,f on)EF− [c∗(zn, f on)] = Ep(zn,f on)EF−

log p(I = 1 |zn, f on, F−) .

(26) Next, we expand log p(I = 1 |zn, f on, F−) using Bayes’ theorem. Considering one positive sample and N negative samples, the prior probabilities are p(I = 1) = 1 /(N +1) and p(I = 0) = N/ (N +1) 

for the collection of negative samples. 

log p(I = 1 |zn, f on, F−) = log p(zn, f on|I = 1) p(I = 1) 

p(zn, f on|I = 1) p(I = 1) + p(zn, f −on |I = 0) p(I = 0) = log p(zn, f on)

p(zn, f on) + N p (zn)p(f on) .

(27) This expression for log p(I = 1 |zn, f on, F−) represents the log-probability of the given f on being the true positive, relative to N distractors drawn from p(zn)p(f on). Continuing from this expression: 

log p(zn, f on)

p(zn, f on) + N p (zn)p(f on) = log 

 p(zn, f on)

p(zn)p(f on) · p(zn)p(f on)

p(zn, f on) + N p (zn)p(f on)



≤ log p(zn, f on)

p(zn)p(f on) − log N. 

(28) Taking the expectation Ep(zn,f on)EF− on both sides of the result from Eq. (26) combined with the inequality above: 

Ep(zn,f on)EF−

log p(I = 1 |zn, f on, F−) ≤ Ep(zn,f on)



log p(zn, f on)

p(zn)p(f on)



− log N. (29) 23 The term Ep(zn,f on)

h

log p(zn,f on) 

> p(zn)p(fon)

i

is the definition of mutual information I(zn; f on). Therefore, by substituting zn = [ ret−1, f on−1] back into Eq. (26) and rewriting I(zn; f on) with the original notation, we have: 

I([ ret−1, f on−1]; f on) ≥ Ic 

> nce

+ log N. (30) This demonstrates that the mutual information is lower-bounded by the InfoNCE objective Ic 

> nce

plus a term log N . This justifies using Ic 

> nce

as a tractable surrogate to maximize a lower bound on the mutual information. Similarly, the upper bound inequality can be derived using the same method. 



I([ ret−1, f on−1]; f on) ≤ I1−c 

> nce

.I1−c 

> nce

≜ log N − Ep(zn,f on)EF−



log exp(1 −c(zn,f on))    

> PNj=1 exp(1 −c(zn,f −o,j n))



. (31) 

# D Intrinsic Reward in Linear MDPs 

This appendix provides a theoretical justification for our proposed intrinsic reward by connecting it to the exploration bonus in LSVI-UCB within the context of linear MDPs. 

D.1 Preliminary 

Least-Squares Value Iteration with Upper Confidence Bounds (LSVI-UCB) is an algorithm designed for efficient exploration and learning in linear MDPs. In a linear MDP, the transition kernel and reward function are assumed to be linear with respect to a d-dimensional feature map η(s, a ) of state-action pairs. Consequently, for any policy π, the action-value function Qπ (s, a ) can be expressed as 

χ⊤η(s, a ) for some parameter vector χ ∈ Rd.LSVI-UCB iteratively collects data and updates the Q-function parameters. In each episode, the agent acts according to the current optimistic Q-function. The parameter χt is then updated via regularized least-squares: 

χt ← arg min 

> χ∈Rd
> m

X

> i=0

h

rt(sit, a it) + γ max  

> a′

Qtarget  

> t

(sit+1 , a ′) − χ⊤η(sit, a it)

i2

+ λ∥χ∥22,

where m is the number of collected transitions (indexed by i), λ > 0 is a regularization parameter, and 

Qtarget  

> t

is typically a previous estimate or a slowly updating target. The closed-form solution involves the Gram matrix Λt = Pmi=0 η(sit, a it)η(sit, a it)⊤ + λI . Crucially, LSVI-UCB employs a UCB-style exploration bonus to construct an optimistic Q-function: Qt(s, a ) = χ⊤ 

> t

η(s, a ) + rucb (s, a ), where the bonus is rucb (s, a ) = ζ η(s, a )⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(s, a )1/2

. This bonus quantifies the epistemic uncertainty associated with the value estimate of (s, a ).

D.2 Connection to LSVI-UCB Bonus 

We establish a connection between our intrinsic reward and the LSVI-UCB exploration bonus. In linear MDPs, C ERMIC ’s parameters Θ is rewritten as ωt and our curiosity representation xt can be represented as xt = ωtη(st, a t) ∈ Rc. Here, η(st, a t) ∈ Rd is the state-action encoding, and 

ωt ∈ Rc×d is a parameter matrix. This representation is learned by predicting the next state st+1 via the regularized least-squares problem: 

ωt ← arg min 

> Wm

X

> i=0

sit+1 − ωη (sit, a it) 2 

> F

+ λ∥ω∥2 

> F

, (32) The proof proceeds by vectorizing the matrix ωt and defining an expanded feature matrix ˜η. Specif-ically, vec( ωt) ∈ Rcd is the column-wise vectorization of ωt, and ˜η(st, a t) ∈ Rcd ×c is a block-diagonal matrix with η(st, a t) repeated c times along its diagonal. This construction satisfies 

vec( ωt)⊤ ˜η(st, a t) = ( ωtη(st, a t)) ⊤. For clarity, the definitions are: 

 vec( ωt) = [ w11 , . . . , w 1d, w 21 , . . . , w cd ]⊤ ∈ Rcd .

˜η(st, a t) = Ic ⊗ η(st, a t) ∈ Rcd ×c. (33) where I(Ic) denotes the identity matrix (with c dimensions), and ⊗ is the Kronecker product. 24 Assumption 1 (Gaussian Prior) We consider a linear model for predicting the c-dimensional next state st+1 from d-dimensional state-action features η(st, a t), formulated as st+1 = W η (st, a t) + ξt.The parameter matrix W ∈ Rc×d is assumed to follow a zero-mean Gaussian prior distribution 

W ∼ N (0 , λ −1I), and the model noise ξt ∈ Rc is assumed to follow a standard multivariate Gaussian distribution ξt ∼ N (0 , I c), independent of W and η(st, a t).

To analyze the intrinsic reward, we adopt a Bayesian linear regression perspective for Eq. (32) . Our goal of the analysis is to obtain the posterior distribution p(ωt|D m) to compute the Bayesian Surprise in the intrinsic reward. Firstly, under Assumption 1, we have: 

st+1 |(st, a t), ω t ∼ N (ωtη(st, a t), I) ≡ N  ˜η(st, a t)⊤vec( ωt), I . (34) Given the Gaussian prior vec( W ) ∼ N (0 , λ −1I), Bayes’ rule states: 

log p(vec( ωt)|D m) = log p(vec( ωt)) + 

> m

X

> i=0

log p(sit+1 |sit, a it, vec( ωt)) + C. (35) where C is a constant. Then, substituting the Gaussian PDF for Eq. (34) into Eq. (35) yields the log-posterior: 

log p(vec( ωt)|D m) = − λ

2 ∥vec( ωt)∥22 − 12

> m

X

> i=0

∥˜η(sit, a it)⊤vec( ωt) − sit+1 ∥22 + C

= − 12 (vec( ωt) − ˜μt)⊤ ˜Λt(vec( ωt) − ˜μt) + C′,

(36) where C′ is a constant and ˜μt = ˜Λ−1

> t

Pmi=0 ˜η(sit, a it)sit+1 , ˜Λt = Pmi=0 ˜η(sit, a it)˜ η(sit, a it)⊤ + λI.Thus, the posterior distribution is vec( ωt)|D m ∼ N (˜ μt, ˜Λ−1 

> t

). The covariance matrix of vec( ωt) is 

˜Λ−1 

> t

. The structure of ˜Λt is: 

˜Λt = In ⊗

> m

X

> i=0

η(sit, a it)η(sit, a it)⊤ + λI

!

= In ⊗ Λt, (37) Notably, Λt = Pmi=0 η(sit, a it)η(sit, a it)⊤ + λI is the Gram matrix from LSVI-UCB. To this end, the intrinsic reward, related to Bayesian Surprise, can be simplified to a change in differential entropy, where Cov( ·) denotes the covariance: 

DKL (p(ωt|(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∪ D m)∥p(ωt|D m)) = DKL (p(vec( ωt)|(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∪ D m)∥p(p(vec( ωt)|D m)) = H(vec( ωt)|D m) − H (vec( ωt)|(st, a t, S t+1 ) ∪ D m)= [log det (Cov(vec( ωt)|D m)) − log det (Cov(vec( ωt)|(st, a t, S t+1 ) ∪ D m))] /2.

(38) Substituting the covariance ˜Λ−1 

> t

and the updated covariance after observing (st, a t, s t+1 ):

DKL (p(ωt|(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∪ D m)∥p(ωt|D m)) =

h

log det  ˜Λt + ˜ η(st, a t)˜ η(st, a t)⊤ − log det  ˜Λt

i

/2=

h

log det  I + ˜ η(st, a t)⊤ ˜Λ−1 

> t

˜η(st, a t)i

/2,

(39) where the last equality follows from the Matrix Determinant Lemma. Given the block-diagonal structure of ˜η(st, a t) and ˜Λ−1 

> t

, the term ˜η(st, a t)⊤ ˜Λ−1 

> t

˜η(st, a t) is a diagonal matrix with c identical scalar entries η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t). Thus, Eq. (39) simplifies to: 

DKL (p(ωt|(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∪ D m)∥p(ωt|D m)) = log det  Ic ⊗ η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t) + Ic

 /2= ( c/ 2) · log  1 + η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t) .

(40) By leveraging the inequality x 

> 2

≤ log(1 + x) ≤ x, we obtain: 

η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t)2 ≤ log  1 + η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t) ≤ η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t). (41) 25 Combining these results, we obtain the bounds for the square root of the mutual information: 

r c

4

η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t)1/2

≤ rit ≤

r c

2

η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t)1/2

. (42) Recalling that the LSVI-UCB bonus is rucb = ζ η(st, a t)⊤Λ−1 

> t

η(st, a t)1/2

, we can express the relationship as: 

1

ζ

r c

4 · rucb ≤ rit ≤ 1

ζ

r c

2 · rucb . (43) Defining ρ = 1

> ζ

p c 

> 4

, this can be written as ρ·rucb ≤ rit≤ √2ρ·rucb . This proof establishes a connection between our proposed intrinsic reward and the UCB bonus, providing theoretical grounding for the stability of our reward mechanism. 

# E Benchmark Adaptation to Sparse-Reward Settings 

Our C ERMIC model and all compared algorithms were trained in environments with sparse reward signals to specifically assess exploration capabilities. However, for a comprehensive evaluation against baselines, particularly those not designed for extreme sparsity, final performance was measured using the original dense extrinsic rewards provided by the benchmarks. To facilitate the sparse-reward training, we adapted standard MARL benchmarks, VMAS and SMACv2 , into sparse-reward configurations as detailed below. This transformation creates challenging scenarios where intrinsic motivation is paramount for effective learning. 

VMAS Benchmarks. For VMAS tasks that originally featured dense rewards (e.g., based on distance-to-target or control efforts), we induced sparsity by identifying a clear success condition for each task and restructuring the reward mechanism accordingly. Specifically, original dense or intermediate reward components were removed or nullified, except for a significant positive reward granted only 

upon the achievement of the predefined success condition (e.g., reaching a target zone, achieving a formation). Episode termination conditions remained largely unchanged, but rewards became predominantly contingent on successful terminal states. For instance, in a Balance ∗ task, agents receive a large positive reward only upon moving the object to the goal region, with zero or minimal rewards during transit. This approach ensures that learning signals are tied to meaningful task completion rather than continuous incremental progress. 

SMACv2 Benchmarks. Similarly, for SMACv2 scenarios, while many already possess somewhat sparse rewards, we further amplified sparsity to stringently test exploration. The primary reward signal was strictly tied to the ultimate battle outcome: a large positive reward for winning, a negative or zero reward for losing, and a neutral or slightly negative reward for a draw. All intermediate battlefield rewards, such as bonuses for damaging enemy units or penalties for sustaining damage, were removed. This concentrates the learning signal at the conclusion of an engagement, compelling agents to learn long-term coordination and strategy based purely on the sparse win/loss feedback, especially in scenarios where incremental damage yields no immediate reward. These modifications ensure that agents in both benchmarks must explore extensively to discover successful action sequences, as intermediate feedback is largely absent, thus providing a robust testbed for curiosity-driven mechanisms like C ERMIC .

# F Supplementary Experimental Results 

Performance Curve Comparison. We present further comparative experiments showcasing the performance of C ERMIC against other methods in Fig. 4 below. The results demonstrate that C ERMIC 

consistently surpasses prior SoTA models and other curiosity-driven approaches, achieving superior task performance. Furthermore, it is observable that our method exhibits more stable learning curves, characterized by narrower error bands. We attribute this enhanced stability and performance to CERMIC ’s ability to effectively filter noisy signals while concurrently encouraging robust exploration. 

Robustness to Noise. To further validate the noise-filtering capabilities of C ERMIC , we conducted comparative experiments in environments augmented with “random box” noise, as depicted in Fig. 5. The results indicate that, in these noisy conditions, C ERMIC maintains more stable learning curves 26 Timesteps (1e6)         

> Buzz Wire *Navigation *
> Reverse Transport *Sampling *
> Flocking *
> Simple Push *
> Normalized Return
> —— QPLEX -ICES —— IPPO -DB —— CPM —— MAPPO -CERMIC

Figure 4: Comparative performance on VMAS .and narrower error bands compared to other algorithms. Notably, this advantage in stability is more pronounced than in the noise-free task counterparts (Fig. 4). Furthermore, we observe that the error bands in the Simple Adversary task are smaller than those in the Ball Trajectory task. This difference can be attributed to the richer multi-agent contextual information available in the former, which includes signals from both adversaries and teammates, whereas the latter primarily involves information from a single partner. Consequently, the increased contextual feedback translates to a stronger noise-filtering effect, as reflected in the learning curves. This underscores C ERMIC ’s ability to leverage multi-agent information to enhance task understanding and mitigate the impact of environmental stochasticity. —— QPLEX -ICES —— IPPO -DB —— CPM —— MAPPO -CERMIC  

> Timesteps (1e6)
> Ball Trajectory* Simple Adversary*
> Normalized Return

Figure 5: Performance comparison under environmental noise on VMAS task. 

Role Diversity and Task Adaptation. While C ERMIC consistently improves performance, we observe a more substantial performance gain over traditional baselines in tasks involving diverse agent roles (e.g., both cooperation and competition, as in Simple Adversary ∗) compared to purely cooperative/competitive settings (e.g., Ball Trajectory ∗); see Fig. 5. We attribute this to the challenge faced by traditional methods in interpreting heterogeneous agent behaviors under partial observability, where inferring intent and role from observations is inherently difficult. In contrast, CERMIC ’s task-adaptive weighting mechanism ( γ) enables agents to better infer and adapt to others’ intentions and plans, thereby enhancing performance in complex social interactions. 

Visualization of Intrinsic Reward. To illustrate the temporal behavior of C ERMIC ’s intrinsic reward, we visualized its values throughout a complete episode of the Balance ∗ task, as shown in Fig. 6. A clear trend is the gradual decrease of this intrinsic reward over time, indicating a diminishing role of curiosity-driven exploration as the agent gains familiarity with the task environment. Furthermore, peaks in the intrinsic reward consistently coincide with an agent encountering novel situations, such as initial environmental entry or first-time interactions with other agents. This observation aligns with our design objective for the intrinsic reward, which is to incentivize exploration of unfamiliar states and interactions. 27 Relative  Reward 

> Encounter Start
> Steps

Figure 6: Visualization of C ERMIC ’s intrinsic reward during one episode of the Balance ∗ task. 

# G Alternative Memory Architectures 

While graph-based memory offers structured relational reasoning, alternative architectures provide different trade-offs.Table 5 compares key architectural parameters with typical example values for these memory types. 

MLP-based Memory. An MLP processes the agent’s current (potentially encoded) observation to output a fixed-size memory vector. This is a stateless, feed-

GRU-based Memory. A Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) maintains a hidden state that is updated at each timestep based on the current encoded observation and its previous state, capturing temporal dependencies. Table 5: Architectural parameters for different memory modules. Parameter Type Graph-based MLP-based GRU-based 

Core Encoding 

Node Embedding Dim ( Dnode ) 256 - -Edge Embedding Dim ( Dedge ) 16 - -Obs. Encoder Output Dim ( Dobs _enc ) 64 (for detection/encoding) 64 64 Memory/State Output Dim 512 ( DGN N _out ) 256 ( DM ) 256 ( DH )

Network Structure 

Obs. Encoder (CNN) Layers/Depth 3 conv layers 3 conv layers 3 conv layers GNN Layers ( LGN N ) 2 - -GNN Hidden Dim ( DGN N _hid ) 256 - -GNN Heads ( Nheads ) 4 - -MLP Hidden Layers ( LM LP ) (Node/Edge Encoders: 2) 2 (post obs-encoder) -MLP Hidden Units/Layer ( UM LP ) (Node/Edge Encoders: 128) 128 -GRU Layers ( LGRU ) - - 2

Est. Total Parameters High Low Medium The Graph-based module is generally the most expressive due to its explicit relational structure but also tends to be the most parameter-heavy. MLP-based memory is the simplest, while GRU-based memory offers a balance for capturing temporal context. The choice depends on the specific requirements of the MARL task, including the complexity of inter-agent interactions and available computational resources. 

# H Implementation Details 

For brevity, we previously use abbreviated task names in Table 1. Their full names are as follows: 

Disper = Disperse , Naviga = Navigation , Sampli = Sampling , Passag = Passage , Transp 

= Transport , Balanc = Balance , GiveWa = GiveWay , Wheel = WheelGathering , Flocki =

Flocking (*: sparse-reward version), StaHun = StagHuntRepeated , CleaUp = Cleanup , ChiGam 

= ChickenGameRepeated , PriDil = PrisonersDilemmaRepeated , pro5v5 = Protoss5v5 , and 

zer5v5 = Zerg5v5 .28 Table 6: Key training hyperparameters. 

Parameter Category Value / Setting 

General Optimization 

Discount Factor ( γ) 0.99 Learning Rate (Adam) 1e-4 Adam Optimizer ϵ 1e-6 

Target Network Updates 

Update Type Soft (Polyak averaging) Polyak Tau ( τ ) 0.005 

Exploration Strategy 

Initial Epsilon ( ϵinit ) 0.8 Final Epsilon ( ϵend ) 0.01 

Training Duration 

Max Frames 3000000 

On-Policy Collection & Training 

Collected Frames per Batch 36000 Environments per Worker 60 Minibatch Iterations 30 Minibatch Size 2400 

Off-Policy Collection & Training 

Optimizer Steps per Collection 1800 Train Batch Size 1024 Replay Buffer Size 1500000 This paragraph outlines the core hyperparameters used for training our models and baselines, unless specified otherwise for particular tasks or algorithms. Specific parameters related to intrinsic rewards (e.g., exploitation weight factor α) are detailed separately in the experimental setup as they vary across tasks and model configurations. Training/evaluation was conducted via BenchMARL suite on NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000 GPUs. 29